

--- 第 1 页 ---

Sheldon Natenbere

OPTION
VOLATILITY

NG

Advanced Trading

Strategies and Techniques

McGraw-Hill

New York San Francisco Washington, D.C. Auckland Bogota
Caracas Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan
Montreal New Delhi San Juan Singapore

Sydney Tokyo Toronto


--- 第 2 页 ---

© 1994, Richard D. Irwin, a Times Mirror Higher Education Group, Inc.
company

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored ina retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, elec-
tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior
written permission of the publisher and the authors.

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the
author and the publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or
other professional advice.

ISBN 1-55738-486-X

Printed in the United States of America

BB

22 21 20 19 18 17

CB/TAQ/BIS

McGraw-Hill
A Disision of The McGraw-Hill Companies


--- 第 3 页 ---

To Paul, for convincing me to become an options trader;
To Hen and Jerry, for their financial help when | needed it;

To Eddie, who encouraged me to finish the book and
get off the computer so he could do his homework;

And most of all to Leona, for her support and encouragement.


--- 第 4 页 ---

¢ Table of Contents +

Preface to the First Edition
Preface to the Second Edition

e1¢

The Language of Options

Contract Specifications
Exercise and Assignment
Market Integrity

Margin Requirements
Settlement Procedures

e2¢

Elementary Strategies

Simple Buy and Sell Strategies
Risk/Reward Characteristics
Combination Strategies
Constructing an Expiration Graph

o3%

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models

Expected Return
Theoretical Value

A Word on Models

A Simple Approach
Exercise Price

Time to Expiration
Price of the Underlying
Interest Rates
Dividends

Volatility


--- 第 5 页 ---

vi Table of Contents

4%

Volatility 51
Random Walks and Normal Distributions 51
Mean and Standard Deviation 56
Underlying Price as the Mean of a Distribution 60
Volatility as a Standard Deviation 60
Lognormal Distributions 61
Daily and Weekly Standard Deviations 65
Volatility and Observed Price Changes 67
A Note on Interest Rate Products 68
Types of Volatilities 69
eo 5%

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 81
e6O%

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 95
The Delta 99
The Gamma 103
The Theta 111
The Vega or Kappa 113
The Rho 116
Summary 118
e7%

Introduction to Spreading 127
What Is a Spread? 127
Why Spread? 132
Spreading as a Risk Management Tool 133
& B

Volatility Spreads 137
Backspread (also referred to as a ratio backspread or long ratio spread) 138
Ratio Vertical Spread (also referred to as a ratio spread, short ratio spread,

vertical spread, or front spread) 139
Straddle 141

Strangle 143


--- 第 6 页 ---

Table of Contents

Butterfly

Time Spread (also referred to as a calendar spread or horizontal spread)
The Effect of Changing Interest Rates and Dividends

Diagonal Spreads

Other Variations

Spread Sensitivities

Choosing an Appropriate Strategy
Adjustments

Entering a Spread Order

09%

Risk Considerations
Choosing the Best Spread
Practical Considerations
How Much Margin for Error?
Dividends and Interest
What Is a Good Spread?
Adjustments
A Question of Style
Liquidity

#10

Bull and Bear Spreads
Naked Positions
Bull and Bear Ratio Spreads

Bull and Bear Butterflies and Time Spreads

Vertical Spreads

11%
Option Arbitrage
Synthetic Positions
Conversions and Reversals
Arbitrage Risk
Boxes
Jelly Rolls
Using Synthetics in Volatility Spreads
Trading without Theoretical Values

vii

145
148
154
157
157
159
161
168
169

173
173
181
187
188
192
193
195
196

199
199
199
201
202

213
213
217
223
228
231
233
235


--- 第 7 页 ---

viit

124%
Early Exercise of American Options
Futures Options
Stock Options
The Effect of Early Exercise on Trading Strategies

e134

Hedging with Options
Protective Calls and Puts
Covered Writes
Fences
Complex Hedging Strategies
Portfolio Insurance

© 14%
Volatility Revisited
Some Volatility Characteristics
Volatility Forecasting
A Practical Approach
Some Thoughts on Implied Volatility

e154
Stock Index Futures and Options
What Is an Index?
Calculating an Index
Replicating an Index
Stock Index Futures
Index Arbitrage
Index Options
Biases in the Index Market

+ 16%

Intermarket Spreading
An Intermarket Hedge
Volatility Relationships
Intermarket Volatility Spreads
Options on Spreads

Table of Contents

241
241
243
250

257
258
260
263
265
268

273
273
279
282
290

301
301
302
304
305
309
313
326

331
335
336
339
351


--- 第 8 页 ---

Table of Contents ix

17%

Position Analysis 353
Some Simple Examples 353
Graphing a Position 358
A Complex Position 367
Futures Option Positions 372

Models and the Real World 385
Markets Are Frictionless 386
Interest Rates Are Constant over the Life of an Option 388
Volatility Is Constant over the Life of the Option 390
Trading Is Continuous 394
Volatility Is Independent of the Price of the Underlying Contract 399

Over small periods of time the percent price changes in an underlying
contract are normally distributed, resulting in a lognormal distribution

of underlying prices at expiration 400
Skewness and Kurtosis 402
Volatility Skews 405
A Final Thought 416
“ Appendix A *

A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 419
* Appendix B +

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 431
Option Pricing Models 431
Normal Distributions 439
Volatility Calculations 442
The Extreme Value Method 443
The Exponential and Natural Logarithm Functions 446
Appendix C +

Characteristics of Volatility Spreads 449

+ Appendix D #
What’s the Right Strategy? 451


--- 第 9 页 ---

x Table of Contents

“+ Appendix E +

Synthetic and Arbitrage Relationships 453
Arbitrage Values for European Options (no early exercise petmitted) 455
Other Useful Relationships: 456

Appendix F

Recommended Reading 457
Elementary Books 457
Intermediate Books 459
Advanced Books 461

“ Index + 463


--- 第 10 页 ---

« Preface to the First Edition +

Within the last decade trading options has increased at an explosive rate. Not only have
traditional market participants, speculators, hedgers, and arbitrageurs all become ac-
tively involved in option markets, but the number of individual floor traders willing to
risk their own capital in these markets has grown dramatically. Yet the trader entering
an option market for the first time may find that his initial efforts are less than totally
successful. Indeed, the learning period in options during which a trader gains full
confidence in his ability to survive and thrive under all types of market conditions may
require many months or even years of trading experience. Unfortunately, the great
majority of traders do not survive this learning period. The usual characteristics of
options, the subleties of the marketplace, and the unforseen risks, all seem to conspire
against the inexperienced trader and eventually lead to his demise.

Much of the pain experienced by a new trader could be avoided if the trader were
better prepared for the realities of option trading. Unfortunately, existing option litera-
ture has tended to take either a highly theoretical approach best suited to an academic
environment, or a simplistic approach presenting options as just another way of trading
stocks or commodities. Neither approach is likely to meet the needs of the serious trader.
The former approach is not only mathematically beyond the capabilities of most traders,
but relies heavily on theoretical assumptions which are too often violated in the real
world. The latter approach cannot possibly prepare a serious trader for the wide variety
of strategies with which he must be familiar, nor with the very real risks to which he
will be exposed.

This book was written with the hope of filling the void in the traditional option
literature by combining theory and real-world practice. Moreover, it was written
Primarily with the serious trader in mind. This includes traders whose firms are actively
Involved in option markets, either by choice or by necessity, or individual traders who
wish to make the most of the opportunities offered by options. This is not meant to
discourage those who are casually or peripherally involved in options markets from
Teading this book. Additional insight into any subject is always worthwhile. But
understanding options requires substantial effort. The serious trader, because his
livelihood often depends on this understanding, wil! usually be more willing to invest
the time and energy required to attain this goal.

; In preparing the reader for the option marketplace, the author has tried to combine
an iMtuitive approach to option theory with a discussion of the real-life problems with
Which he will be confronted. Of course, the reader who is comfortable with mathemat-
Ics is in no way discouraged from delving more deeply into the theory of option pricing

xt


--- 第 11 页 ---

xi Preface

in many of the excellent academic presentations of the subject. But the important point
is that such a rigorous opproach is not necessary for success in option trading. Indeed,
the great majority of successful option traders have never even looked at a mathematical
presentation of option theory. Nor would many of them be capable of understanding
the complex mathematics if they did.

Much of the presentation in this book will necessarily be colored by the author’s
personal experiences as a floor trader. Sophisticated hedging strategies, such as portfolio
insurance, and complex intermarket spreading strategies are touched upon only briefly,
if at all. Yet the principles of option evaluation which enable a floor trader to successfully
participate in an option market are the same principles which will enable any participant
to make the best use of options, regardless of the reasons for entering the market.
Additionally, the author is able to place special emphasis on a lesson which floor traders
quickly learn but which casual traders too often forget. Without a very healthy respect
for the risks of option trading and a full understanding of risk management techniques,
today’s profits can quickly turn into tomorrow’s losses.

Because of the more recent introduction of listed options on futures contracts and
the increased interest in these markets, the author has tended to concentrate the
examples in the text on these options. However, the principles which lead to success
in futures options are equally valid in commodity, stock, and index option markets.

The core material in this book was developed in classes taught by the author to
traders at the Chicago Board of Trade. In expanding the material into book form the
author has tried to draw on a wide variety of other sources. Foremost among these are
the many floor traders who offered their comments and criticisms. In addition, special
thanks go to Greg Monroe of the Chicago Board of Trade Education Department and
Mark Rzepczynski of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange Research Department for their
comments on the text, and to David Isbister of Monetary Investments International for
preparation of some of the values used in the tables.

Finally, my thanks to the staff at Probus Publishing for their encouragement,
patience, and assistance in dealing with a first time author.

Sheldon Natenberg
Chicago


--- 第 12 页 ---

«+ Preface to the Second Edition +

In 1986, when I first discussed with Probus Publishing the idea of an option book for
professional traders, there was considerable doubt as to whether there would be
sufficient interest to justify publication of such a book. After all, how many professional
option traders are there? To everyone’s (pleasant) surprise, when the book came out not
only did it turn out that a large number of professionals were purchasing the book, but
many non-professionals also seemed to be very interested in this approach.

The revised edition is no different in its focus. The new material is likely to be of
greatest interest to the serious option trader. While the material may also be of interest
to the non-professional, it is the professional, whose livelihood depends on a complete
understanding of options, who will be most willing to spend the time required to master
the material.

In the new edition J have tried to incorporate the comments and suggestions which
traders have made concerning the first edition. Some of the more important additions:

Expanded coverage of stock options—When I sat down to write the first edition
the emphasis was on commodity options. This was primarily a marketing decision. At
the time there were several books available on stock options, but hardly any commodity
options. However, with the success of the first edition, and at the suggestion of many
friends at the CBOE, I felt it would be worthwhile giving stock options equal emphasis.

More on volatility—Given its importance, a second chapter on volatility has been
added with more detailed discussion of volatility characteristics and considerations.

A chapter on stock index futures and options—These markets have become so

important, and are so interconnected, that some discussion is mandatory in any book
on options. While one chapter cannot possibly cover every aspect of index markets, I
have tried to touch on how these markets differ from traditional option markets, and
the effect of these differences on trading strategies.
___ A discussion of intermarket spreading—Much of the most sophisticated trading
involves spreading options in one underlying market against options in a different
underlying market. I have included a discussion on the relationship between similar
underlying markets, and the methods traders use to construct spreads when a relation-
ship appears to be mispriced.

A more detailed discussion of volatility skews—This is probably the one area about
which I am most often asked, the tendency of different exercise prices to trade at
different implied volatilities. I have tried to include a discussion of this phenomenon,
and several methods by which traders deal with this problem.

xiii


--- 第 13 页 ---

xiv Preface

I have also deleted two appendicies:

A guide to software—New software is being introduced so quickly that it did not
seem practical to include a list of vendors and products as | did in the first edition. Nor
am I familiar with every piece of software available, so it would be unfair to those
vendors who have good products but whom I might inadvertantly omit. The best way
for traders to choose software is to talk to other traders and to read some of the industry
periodicals to find out what programs are being used to evaluate options.

Historical volatilities—When the first edition came out I suspected that some new
traders might not have access to any volatility data, so I included some historical
volatility graphs for selected futures contracts. Now, however, volatility data in some
form is available to almost all option traders so I did not feel that volatility charts, which
would quickly become outdated, would be worth including.

As in the first edition, I make no claims to being a theoretician, and this book is not
intended to take the place of a good book on option theory. But theory is only important
as a means to an end—the actual trading of options in the marketplace. Whatever theory
is in the book, I have tried to present in non-technical language. For a more complete
discussion of option pricing theory, the reader can consult any of the advanced books
to be found in Appendix F.

Nor is it my intention to make decisions for the reader or to tell the reader how to
trade. There are many ways to trade successfully in an option market. Regardless of a
trader’s own style, without a complete familiarity with the necessary tools, and a
proficiency in their use, it is almost impossible to be successful in options. I have tried
to explain what these tools are, how they work, and the variety of ways in which traders
use them to make decisions that fit their own individual needs and trading styles. In
doing so, I have attempted, as much as possible, to avoid contaminating the reader with
my own personal preferences and prejudices.

In a sense, nothing in either this or the first edition of Option Volatility and Pricing
Strategies is new. All the theory, trading strategies, and risk management considera-
tions, are familiar to experienced traders in one form or another. My goal has been to
put all this material together and present it in an orderly, easily understandable format
which I hope will form a solid foundation upon which an aspiring option trader can
build a successful career.

This book is a result not only of my efforts, but of the efforts of the many traders
who were kind enough to read this material and offer their comments and suggestions.
Without their help I could not hope to cover all the important aspects of options. To all
of them, and to the editors at Probus Publishing Company, who displayed patience
above and beyond the call of duty, I offer my thanks and enduring gratitude.

Sheldon Natenberg
Chicago
June 1994


--- 第 14 页 ---

Y 1 &

The Language of Options

Every option market brings together traders and investors with different expectations
and goals. Some enter the market with an opinion on which direction prices will move.
Some intend to use options to protect existing positions against adverse price move-
ment. Some hope to take advantage of price discrepancies between similar or related
products. Some act as middlemen, buying and selling as an accommodation to other
market participants and hoping to profit from the difference between the bid and ask
rice.

, Even though expectations and goals differ, every trader’s education must begin
with an introduction to the terminology of option trading, and to the rules and
regulations which govern trading activity. Without a facility in the language of options,
a trader will find it impossible to communicate his desire to buy or sell in the
marketplace. Without a clear understanding of the terms of an option contract, and his
rights and responsibilities under that contract, a trader cannot hope to make the best
use of options, nor will he be prepared for the very real risks of trading.

CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS

Options are of two types. A call option is the right to buy or take a fong position in a
given asset (typically a security, commodity, index, or futures contract) at a fixed price
on or before a specified date. A put optionis the right to sell or take a short position in
a given asset.

Note the difference between an option and a futures contract. A futures contract
Tequires delivery at a fixed price. The buyer and seller of a futures contract both have
obligations which they must meet. The seller must make delivery and the buyer must
take delivery of the asset. The buyer ofan option, however, has a choice. He can choose
to take delivery (a call} or make delivery (a put). If the buyer of an option chooses to
either make or take delivery, the seller of the option is obligated to take the other side.
In option trading all rights lie with the buyer and all obligations with the seller.

The asset to be bought or sold under the terms of the option is the underlying asset
Or, More simply, the underlying. The exercise price, or strike price, is the price at which
the underlying will be delivered should the holder of an option choose to exercise his
Tight to buy or sell, The date after which the option may no longer be exercised is the
expiration date.


--- 第 15 页 ---

2 Chapter I

If an option is purchased directly from a bank or other dealer, the quantity of the
underlying to be delivered, the exercise price, and the expiration date can all be tailored
to meet the buyer’s individual requirements. If the option is purchased on an exchange,
the quantity of the underlying to be delivered, as well as the exercise price and
expiration date, are predetermined by the exchange.!

As an example of an exchange traded option, the buyer of a crude oil October 21
call on the New York Mercantile Exchange has the right to take a long position in one
October crude oil futures contract for 1,000 barrels of crude oil (the underlying), at a
price of $21 per barrel (the exercise price), on or before October expiration (the
expiration date). The buyer of a General Electric March 80 put on the Chicago Board
Options Exchange has the right to take a short position in 100 shares of General Electric
stock (the underlying) at a price of $80 per share (the exercise price}, on or before March
expiration (the expiration date).

Since stock has no expiration date, the underlying asset for a stock option is simply
some number of shares in the underlying stock. In the case of futures options, however,
the situation can be somewhat confusing, since a futures contract has a limited life span.
The underlying asset for an option on a futures contract is usually the futures month
identical to the expiration month of the option. The underlying asset for a crude oil
October 21 call on the NYMEX is one October crude oil futures contract. The
underlying asset fora Treasury Bond June 96 put on the Chicago Board of Trade is one
June Treasury Bond futures contract.

Some futures exchanges also list serial options, whereby options with different
expiration dates have identical underlying futures contracts. When there is no futures
contract with the same expiration month as the option, the underlying contract for that
option is the nearest futures contract after the expiration of the option. For example,
the underlying for a December Deutschemark option on the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange is one December Deutschemark futures contract. With no October or
November futures contract available, the underlying for an October or November
Deutschemark option is also one December futures contract. December is the nearest
futures month after the expiration of October and November options.

Expiration dates for exchange traded contracts are not uniform, but are set by each
individual exchange. The expiration date for stock options in the United States is usually
the third Saturday after the third Friday of the expiration month. For options on futures
contracts, however, the expiration need not coincide with the delivery month specified
in the option contract. In some cases the exact expiration date for a futures option can
predate the delivery month of the underlying futures contract by several weeks. A crude
oil option on the NYMEX will typically expire the first Saturday of the preceding month,
so that an October option will actually expire the first Saturday in September.

1. Several exchanges have recently introduced flex options, which permit the buyer and seller to negotiate
both the exercise price and expiration date. These are still considered exchange traded options since
the contracts are guaranteed by the exchange.


--- 第 16 页 ---

The Language of Options 3

Figure 1-1: Contract Specifications

Crude Oil* October ai Call
| Expiration Exercise |

Underlying Date Price Type
GE March 80 Put

*If this is a futures option, the underlying is a futures contract rather than the physical commodity.

Figure 1-2: An Option Buy Order



--- 第 17 页 ---

4 Chapter I

Figure 1-3: An Option Sell Order

EXERCISE AND ASSIGNMENT

A trader who owns a call or a put option has the right to exercise that option prior to
its expiration date, thereby converting the option into a long underlying position, in the
case of a call, ora short underlying position, in the case of a put. A trader who exercises
a crude oil October 21 call has chosen to take a long position in one October crude oil
futures contract at $21 per barrel. A trader who exercises a GE March 80 put has chosen
to take a short position in 100 shares of GE stock at $80 per share. Once an option is
exercised it ceases to exist, just as if it had been allowed to expire unexercised.

A trader who intends to exercise an option must submit an exercise notice to either
the seller of the option, if purchased from a dealer, or to the guarantor of the option, if
purchased on an exchange. When a valid exercise notice is submitted, the seller of the
option is assigned. Depending on the type of option, he will pe required to take a long
or short position in the underlying contract at the specified exercise price.

In addition to its underlying contract, exercise price, expiration date, and type, an
option is further identified by the conditions of exercise. An option is either American,


--- 第 18 页 ---

The Language of Options

Figure 1-4: The Exercise and Assignment Process

>_> Clearing House |) —————»- —_——_+

Clearing firm notifies the
clearing house that the
buyer wishes to exercise

ee
Buyer's Clearing Firm

t

Buyer notifies his clearing firm
that he wishes to exercise his
option thereby taking @ long
(call) or short (put) position

in the underlying instrument
at the exercise price

'

Holder of a Long
Option Position
(Buyer)

Figure 1-5: An Exercise Notice

Clearing house chooses a

seller at random and notifies
the seller's clearing firm that
the seller has been assigned

| Seller's Clearing Firm

Seller is notified by his clearing
firm that he has been assigned,
and that he now has a short
(call) or long (put) position

in the underlying instrument

at the exercise price

Y

Holder of a Short
Option Position
(Seller)

DATE EXERCISE TIME STAMP
NOTICE
PUT

QTy STK/COMM MONTH orice roreDAY

\0 DM Mar 5 |" x Initials; SOHN
Account #
Firm #
Broker #

Per



--- 第 19 页 ---

6 Chapter I

Figure 1-6: An Assignment Notice

_ DATE ASSIGNMENT
NOTICE
QTy STK/COMM MONTH once PUT CALL
15 [Gude Ol} Oct is) X
Initials: RIN
5 |7-Bonds | Dec 1 |X Account #
Firm #

whereby the holder can exercise the option at any time prior to expiration, or European,
whereby the holder can exercise the option only on expiration day.” The great majority
of exchange traded options throughout the world are American options, carrying with
them the right of early exercise. Indeed, all U.S. exchange traded stock and futures
options are American.?

As in any competitive market, an option’s price, or premium, is determined by
supply and demand. Buyers and sellers make competitive bids and offers in the
marketplace. When a bid and offer coincide, a trade is made. The premium paid for an
option can be separated into two components, the intrinsic value and the time value.
An option’s intrinsic value is the amount which would be credited to the option holder’s
account if he were to exercise the option and close out the position against the
underlying contract at the current market price. For example, with gold trading at $435
per ounce, the intrinsic value of a $400 call is $35. By exercising his option, the holder
of the $400 call can buy gold at $400 per ounce. If he sells gold at the market price of

2. Since exchanges need time to process exercise and assignment notices, the holder of an exchange
traded option must usually submit an exercise notice no later than the close of business on the day prior
to expiration.

3. Certain index options, such as the S&P 500 traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange, and the
Major Market traded on the American Stock Exchange, are European. Some foreign currency options
traded on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange are also European.



--- 第 20 页 ---

The Language of Options 7

$435 per ounce, $35 per ounce will be credited to his account. With a certain stock
trading at $62, the intrinsic value ofa $70 put is $8. By exercising his option, the holder
of the put can sell the stock at $70 per share. If he then buys the stock back at the market
price of $62, he will show a total credit of $8.

A call will only have intrinsic value if its exercise price is less than the current
market price of the underlying contract. A put will only have intrinsic value if its exercise
price is greater than the current market price of the underlying contract. The amount
of intrinsic value is the amount by which the call’s exercise price is less than the current
underlying price, or the amount by which the put’s exercise price is greater than the
current underlying price. No option can have an intrinsic value less than zero.

Usually an option’s price in the marketplace will be greater than its intrinsic value.
The additional amount of premium beyond the intrinsic value which traders are willing
to pay for an option is the time value, sometimes also referred to as the option’s time
premium or extrinsic value. As we shall see, market participants are willing to pay this
additional amount because of the protective characteristics afforded by an option over
an outright long or short position in the underlying contract.

An option’s premium is always composed of precisely its intrinsic value and its time
value. If a $400 gold call is trading at $50 with gold at $435 per ounce, the time value
of the call must be $15, since the intrinsic value is $35. The two components must add
up to the option’s total premium of $50. If a $70 put ona stock is trading for $9 with
the stock at $62, the time value of the put must be $1, since the intrinsic value is $8.
The intrinsic value and the time value must add up to the option’s premium of $9.

Even though an option’s premium is always composed of its intrinsic value and its
time value, it is possible for one or both of these components to be zero. If the option
has no intrinsic value, its price in the marketplace will consist solely of time value. If the
option has no time value, its price will consist solely of intrinsic value. In the latter case,
We say that the option is trading at parity.

While an option’s intrinsic value can never be less than zero, it is possible for an
option, if it is European, to have a negative time value. (More about this when we look
at early exercise in Chapter 12.) When this happens the option can trade for less than
parity. Usually, however, an option’s premium will reflect some non-negative amount
of intrinsic and time value.

Any option which has a positive intrinsic value is said to be in-the-money by the
amount of the intrinsic value. With a stock at $44, a $40 call is $4 in-the-money. With
Deutschemarks at 57.75, a 59 put is 1.25 in-the-money. An option which has no
intrinsic value is said to be out-of-the-money. The price of an out-of-the-money option
Consists solely of time value. In order to be in-the-money, a call (put) must have an
exercise price lower (higher) than the current price of the underlying contract. Note
that if a call is in-the-money, a put with the same exercise price and underlying contract
Must be out-of-the-money. Conversely, if the put is in-the-money, a call with the same
exercise price must be out-of-the-money.

Finally, an option whose exercise price is identical to the current price of the
Underlying contract is said to be at-the-money. Technically, such an option is also
OUt-Of the-money since it has no intrinsic value. We make the distinction between an


--- 第 21 页 ---

8 Chapter |

Figure 1-7: In- and Out-of-the-Money Options

Current
Underlying
Price

Lower Exercise Prices Higher Exercise Prices

~~ >
In-the-Money Calls Out-of-the-Money Calls

Out-of-the-Money Puts In-the-Money Puts

~~? =

at-the-money and out-of-the-money option because an at-the-money option has the
greatest amount of time premium and is usually traded very actively.

If we want to be very precise, the exercise price of an option must be identical to
the current price of the underlying contract for the option to be at-the-money. However,
for exchange-traded options, the term is commonly applied to the call and put whose
exercise price is closest to the current price of the underlying contract. With a stock at
$74 and $5 between exercise prices ($65, $70, $75, $80, etc.)}, the $75 call and the
$75 put would be considered the at-the-money options. These are the call and put
options with exercise prices closest to the current price of the underlying contract.

MARKET INTEGRITY

An important consideration for every market participant is the integrity of the market.
No trader will want to trade in a market where there is a chance that the opposing trader
will default on a contract. If a trader purchases an option, he wants to be certain that
the seller will fulfill the terms of the contract if the option is exercised.

In order to guarantee that the integrity of the market will be maintained, each
options exchange has established a progression of responsibility for the fulfillment of the
terms of an option. The primary responsibility falls to the individual trader. If the seller
of an option is assigned, he must be prepared to take the required long or short position
in the underlying contract at the specified exercise price. In practical terms, this means
a trader must have access to capital at least equal to the option’s intrinsic value.

If an individual trader is unable to fulfill the terms of the contract, the responsibility
falls to the trader’s clearing firm. A clearing firm is a member firm of the exchange which
processes trades made by an individual, and which agrees to fulfill any financial
obligation arising from those trades. No individual may trade on an exchange without
first becoming associated with a clearing firm.

If the clearing firm cannot fulfill the terms of the contract, the final responsibility
rests with the clearing house. Each exchange has established, or has become a member
of, a clearing house which guarantees the integrity of all trades. Once an option trade
has been made, the connection between the buyer and seller is severed, with the


--- 第 22 页 ---

The Language of Options 9

clearing house assuming the role of buyer from every seller, and seller to every buyer.
jf there were no central clearing house, the buyer of an option would be totally
dependent on the good faith of the seller or the seller’s clearing firm to fulfill the terms
of the option in the event of exercise, Because the clearing house guarantees every trade,
all buyers can be certain there will be an opposing party prepared to make or take
delivery if an option is exercised. The clearing process is shown in Figure 1-8.

This system of guarantees has proven effective in ensuring the integrity of options
exchanges. While individual traders and clearing firms occasionally fail, a clearing house
has never failed in the United States.

MARGIN REQUIREMENTS

When a trader makes an opening trade on an exchange, the exchange may require the
trader to deposit with the clearing house some amount of margin, or good faith capital.4
Such deposits ensure that if the market moves adversely, the trader will still be able to
fulfill any future financial obligations resulting from the trade.

In lieu of cash, margin requirements may often be met by depositing government
treasury instruments or, less commonly, commercial securities. Clearing firms collect
these margin requirements from their traders and forward the funds to the clearing

Figure 1-8: The Clearing Process

If reports from both clearing
firms match, the trade

becomes official.
| Clearing House +7
A If the reports do not match,

they are returned to each
clearing firm, and from there

Buyer's clearing fi
y aring im to the individual traders Seller's cleaning firm

teports trade to tificati reports trade to
clearing house. for rectification. clearing house.

Buyer's Clearing Firm Seller's Clearing Firm

Buyer reports trade Seller reports trade
to his clearing firm. to his clearing firm.

So Trading Floor |——_—_}Jj»-

Buyer and seller agree
on acontract, quantity,
and price.

Margin requirements for a professional trader in an equity option market are referred to as a Aaircut


--- 第 23 页 ---

10 Chapter /

house. In theory, margin deposits at the clearing house still belong to the individual
trader and, as such, any interest or dividends accruing to the margin deposit also belongs
to the trader. Some clearing firms, however, do not return this interest to the trader,
claiming that it is part of the fee paid by the trader for the clearing services of the member
firm. This can occasionally become a sensitive point between trader and clearing firm,
and should be settled before an individual begins to trade.

Margin requirements for both options and underlying contracts are set by the
clearing house, using as guidelines the current value of the position as well as the
potential risk. While an underlying position, particularly ifit is a futures contract, usually
has a fixed margin requirement, the margin for an option position can change over time
since the margin for an option often depends on the amount by which it is in- or
out-of-the-money. Positions consisting of a combination of options, or options and
underlying instruments, may have reduced margin requirements because the risk to one
contract may be partially offset by the value of another contract. Additionally, traders
who are exchange members may receive professional consideration in the form of
reduced margin requirements. Every trader should become familiar with the margin
requirements for the market in which he is trading. Doing so will ensure that he has
sufficient capital to initiate and hold positions as long as he deems necessary.

SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES

New option traders are often confused because settlement procedures may vary from
one exchange to another. Indeed, settlement procedures for an option and its underlying
contract may differ. Two methods are commonly used to settle exchange-traded
contracts—stock-type settlement and futures-type settlement.

Suppose a trader buys 100 shares of a $50 stock. The value of the stock is $5,000,
and the buyer is required to pay the seller the full amount. If the stock rises to $60 per
share, the owner of the stock will show a profit of $10 per share, or a total profit of
$1,000. Even so, he won't be able to actually spend this $1,000 profit until he formally
liquidates the position by selling his 100 shares at $60 per share. This type of settlement
procedure, where purchase requires full and immediate payment, and where profits or
losses are unrealized until the position is liquidated, is known as stock-type settlement.

In contrast to stock-type settlement, futures-type settlement requires no initial cash
payment from the buyer to the seller. Moreover, all profits or losses are immediately
realized, even if the position is not liquidated. If a trader buys a gold futures contract
covering 100 ounces of gold for $450 per ounce, the full value of the contract is
$45,000. The buyer, however, is not required to pay the seller the full $45,000 value
of the contract. The buyer does not have to pay any money at all. He is only required to
deposit with the clearing house some amount of good-faith margin. At the end of each
trading day both the buyer and the seller will immediately realize any profits or losses
resulting from movement in the price of the gold futures contract. If gold rises from $450
to $470 per ounce, $2,000 ($20 x 100) will be credited to the buyer’s account, and he
will have immediate use of these funds even if he does not liquidate the position. Of
course, if the price of gold drops to $430 per ounce, he will realize an immediate loss


--- 第 24 页 ---

The Language of Options I]

of $2,000. If he does not have sufficient funds in his account to cover this loss, the
clearing house will issue a variation call.

There is an important distinction between a margin call and a variation call. A
margin Call is issued by the clearing house to ensure that a trader can fulfill future
financial obligations should the market move against him. Margin calls can be met with
funds which, even though deposited at the clearing house, still belong to the trader and
consequently can earn interest for the trader. A variation call is issued in order to fulfill
current financial obligations in the form of realized losses. A variation call must be met
with a cash payment which is immediately deducted from a trader’s account. If a trader
has deposited securities with the clearing house as margin and receives a variation call,
he must either deposit the additional variation amount in cash, or the clearing house
will sell the securities in his account to generate enough cash to meet the variation call.
If the remaining securities and cash in the account is not sufficient to meet the current
margin requirements, the trader may be forced to liquidate his position.

We make this very important distinction between stock- and futures-type settle-
ment because some options are settled like stock and some options are settled like
futures. It is important for a trader to know which he is trading. Currently all
exchange-traded options in the United States, whether options on stock, futures,
indices, or foreign currencies, are settled like stock. Options must be paid for immedi-
ately and in full, and profits or losses are unrealized until the position is liquidated. In
stock option markets this is both logical and consistent, since both the underlying
contract and options on that contract are settled using identical procedures. However,
on U.S. futures options markets, the underlying contract is settled one way (futures-type
settlement} while the options are settled in a different way (stock-type settlement). This
can sometimes cause problems when a trader has bought or sold an option to hedge a
futures position. Even if the profits from the option position exactly offset the losses from
the futures position, the profits from the option position, because the options are settled
like stock, are only paper profits. On the other hand, the losses from the futures position
will require an immediate cash outlay to cover a variation call. If a trader is unaware of
the different settlement procedures, he can occasionally find himself with unexpected
cash flow problems,

The settlement situation on many exchanges outside the U.S. has been simplified
by making option and underlying settlement procedures identical. If the underlying is
Subject to stock-type settlement, then so are the options on the underlying. If the
Underlying is subject to futures-type settlement, then so are the options. Under this
Method a trader is unlikely to get a surprise variation call on a position which he thinks
1S well hedged.

Before concluding this chapter, it will be useful to define the terms long and short
a8 they are used in option trading versus their use in trading an underlying contract. In
4 long underlying position a trader will profit if prices rise and lose if prices fall. In a short
underlying position a trader will profit if prices fall and lose if prices rise. There is a
tendency to carry this terminology over into the option market by referring to any
Position which will profit from a rise in the price of the underlying contract as a long
Position, and any position which will profit from a fall in price as a short position.


--- 第 25 页 ---

12 Chapter |

More generally, however, the terms long and short refer to the purchase or sale of
a contract, and this is the sense in which we apply these terms to option trading. A trader
who has purchased an option is long the option, and a trader who has sold the option
is short. There is no confusion when we refer to a long call position because the trader
who is long a call also has a long marker position. Calls will, in theory, rise in value if
the underlying market rises. But a long put position is a short market position. A trader
who has purchased a put wants the underlying market to decline because a put will
theoretically increase in value as the market declines. Throughout the text, whenever
there is the possibility of confusion, an attempt will be made to distinguish between a
long or short market position versus a long or short option position.


--- 第 26 页 ---

oe 2 &

Elementary Strategies

The trader who enters an option market for the first time may find himself subjected to
a form of “contract shock.” Unlike a trader in equities or futures, whose choices are
limited to a small number of instruments, an option trader must often deal with a
pewildering assortment of contracts. With at least three different expiration months,
with each month having several different exercise prices, and with both calls and puts
available at each exercise price, it is not unusual for an option trader to be faced with
as many as 40 different contracts.

Even if we eliminate the inactively traded options, a new trader may still have to
deal with 15 or 20 different options. With so many choices available, a trader needs
some logical method of deciding which options actually represent profit opportunities.
Which should he buy? Which should he sell? Which should he avoid altogether? The
choices are so numerous that many prospective option traders give up in frustration.

For the trader who does persevere, a certain logic in the pricing of options begins
to emerge. As he becomes familiar with this logic, he can begin to formulate potentially
profitable strategies. Initially he will concentrate on the purchase or sale of individual
options. From there he will go on to combination strategies. Eventually he will become
comfortable with complex strategies involving several different contracts.

How might a beginning trader assess an option’s value? One simple method
depends on guessing where the underlying contract will be at expiration. If an option
Position is held to expiration, the option will be worth either zero, if it is at- or
out-of-the-money, or intrinsic value (parity), if it is in-the-money. The purchase of an
option will be profitable if its trade price is less than its value at expiration. The sale of
aN option will be profitable if its trade price is greater than its value at expiration.

SIMPLE BUY AND SELL STRATEGIES

For example, suppose the following options are available with two months remaining
{0 expiration, and the underlying contract trading at 99.00:

85 90 95 100 105 110 115
Calls 14.05 935 550 2.70 1.15 45 20
Puts 10 45 155 3.70 710 11.35 1610

Suppose we believe that the underlying contract will rise to at least 108 by
expiration. We might then purchase a 100 call for 2.70. If we are correct, and the
Contract does in fact end at 108, our profit at expiration will be the option’s intrinsic

13


--- 第 27 页 ---

14 Chapter 2

value of 8.00 less the 2.70 we originally paid, or 5.30. Given the above prices, if the
underlying market rises to 108 by expiration we will show a profit if we purchase any
call with an exercise price less than 110. The intrinsic value of each of these options at
expiration will be greater than its current price in the marketplace.

What about the 110 and 115 calls? If we believe that 108.00 is a reasonable upside
goal for the underlying contract, but consider it unlikely that the price will rise above
110, then we will prefer to be sellers of the 110 and 115 calls. If we sell the 110 call
for .45 and the underlying contract never rises above 110.00, the 110 call will expire
worthless and we will get to keep the full premium of .45. We can also sell the 115 call
for .20, giving us an additional 5 point margin for error. If the underlying contract never
rises above 115,00, the 115 call will expire worthless and we will get to keep the full
premium of .20.

We can use the same approach to assess the potential profit from the purchase or
sale of a put. As with a call, a put’s intrinsic value at expiration must be greater than its
trade price in order for the purchase of a put to be profitable. If the underlying contract
rises to 108.00 by expiration, any put with an exercise price of 105 or less will be
worthless. If we sell any of these puts, we will profit by the full amount of the premium.
If we sell the 110 or 115 puts, they will not be totally worthless at expiration because,
with the underlying contract at 108.00, they will have intrinsic values of 2.00 and 7.00,
respectively. However, this will still be less than their trade prices of 11.35 and 16.10.
We will show a profit of 9.35 from the sale of the 110 put and 9.10 from the sale of the
115 put.

As we change our assumptions about the likely price of the underlying contract at
expiration, we alter the likely profit or loss from any option position. If, instead of rising
to 108.00, the underlying contract actually rises to 120.00, the purchase of the 100 call
for 2.70 will result in a profit of 17.30 rather than 5.30. On the other hand, if the
underlying contract falls to 90.00, the purchase of the 100 call will result in the loss of
the full premium of 2.70. In the latter case, if we sell the 110 put for 11.35, instead of
making 9.35 as we would with the underlying contract at 108.00, we will actually lose
8.65.

Using a value for an option of either zero or intrinsic value, we can graph the profit
or loss at expiration from any option trade which we might make today. Such graphs
not only enable the new trader to assess the likely profitability of an option trade, but
also help him to understand some of the unusual characteristics of options. However,
before looking at graphs of various option positions, we ought to look at the profit and
loss graph of an underlying contract. Because it is a derivative instrument, an option’s
value is always dependent on the price of the underlying instrument. At expiration an
option’s value is totally dependent on the price of the underlying contract. Indeed, if we
have an opinion on the likely price of the underlying contract at some date in the future,
we don’t need to trade options at all. We can simply buy or sell the underlying contract.

Figure 2-1 shows the value at expiration of both a long and a short position in our
example underlying contract taken at the current price of 99.00. The horizontal (x) axis
represents the price of the underlying futures contract, and the vertical (y) axis
Tepresents the profit or loss from our position. Note that each graph is a straight 45° line


--- 第 28 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 15

Figure 2-1

10
AS long an underlying

contract at 99.00 7a

85

eo

Protit

Loss

short an underlying x

contract at 99.00 ZS

extending infinitely far in either direction.! The potential profit or loss to each position
is therefore unlimited. Note also that there is a continuous one-to-one relationship
between movement in the underlying contract and the value of the position. If we take
a long position, for each point the underlying contract rises, we make a point; for each
point the underlying contract falls, we lose a point. If we take a short position the
Situation is just reversed. For each point the underlying contract rises, we lose a point;
for each point the underlying contract falls, we make a point.

Using the same evaluation method, Figure 2-2 shows the profit or loss at expiration
from the purchase of a 100 call at 2.70. Note that in this case the graph is no longer a
Straight line. If the underlying contract falls below 100 at expiration the 100 call will be
out-of-the-money and therefore worthless, and we will lose the full 2.70 we paid for the
Cail. Above 100, the call will be in-the-money, and will increase in value at the same
Tate as the underlying contract; the position will gain one point in value for each point
rise in the value of the underlying contract. If the underlying contract finishes at 102.70,
the 100 call will be worth its intrinsic value of 2.70, and we will break exactly even.
Above 102.70, the profit from the purchase of the 100 call is potentially unlimited, just
like a long position in the underlying contract.

See

lof course, an underlying price cannot fall below zero, so the downside profit or loss is in theory limited.
However, if the price of an underlying contract should go to zero, it will probably seem like an unlimited
Profit or loss to most traders.


--- 第 29 页 ---

16 Chapter 2

Figure 2-2

10
long a 100 call at 2.70

Profit

24 exercise price
(100)

maxium loss (-2.70) { (102.70)
break even

~"

Loss

85 90 95 100 105 110 115

RISK/REWARD CHARACTERISTICS

The profit and loss graph of a long call position at expiration will always have the same
general shape as the graph in Figure 2-2. The position will always have limited downside
tisk and unlimited upside profit potential. The exact point at which the maximum loss
will occur is determined by the exercise price (the point at which the graph bends) and
the price of the option. Graphs of long positions in the 95, 100, and 105 calls are shown
in Figure 2-3.

Figure 2-4 represents the profit and loss from a short position in the 95, 100, and
105 calls. These are simply inversions of the long call graphs. The positions now have
profit potential limited to the amount of the premium for which they were sold, and
unlimited upside risk similar to a short position in the underlying contract.

Figure 2-5 represents long positions in the 95, 100, and 105 puts. The risk/reward
characteristics of these positions are similar to long call positions, but now the limited
risk is on the upside and the unlimited profit potential is on the downside. The position
will break even if the underlying contract falls below the exercise price by exactly the
amount of the option’s trade price. Below that break-even price the potential profit to
the position is unlimited, increasing by one point for each point drop in the price of the
underlying contract.


--- 第 30 页 ---

Elementary Strategies

17

Sh
Figure 2-3

Profit

Loss

40

87

6

44

long a 95 call at 5.50 — ———
long at 100 call at 2.70
long at 105 call at 1.15 ---~ >>

90 95 100 105

110

a
115

Profit

Loss

short a 95 call at 5.50
short a 100 call at 2.70

short a 105 call at 1.15 - ~~



--- 第 31 页 ---

18 Chapter 2

Figure 2-5

10

8-4 long a 95 putat1.55  --------~

long a 100 put at 3.70

64 long a 105 put at 7.10 — ——— -
ge 4
2
Qo 2

0 | i

. S100 105 } 1.55
a \
2] ‘ .
3 4 - — -7.10
‘,
-65 ‘
~
es —>
-85
-10 pe T T q
85 90 95 100 105 110 115

The short put positions in Figure 2-6 are inversions of the graphs in Figure 2-5. Each
position has upside profit potential limited to the amount of the trade price, and a
potentially unlimited loss similar to a long position in the underlying contract.

Figures 2-3 through 2-6 illustrate two of the most important characteristics of
options: buyers of options have limited risk and potentially unlimited reward; sellers of
options have limited reward and potentially unlimited risk. More specifically, net buyers
(sellers) of calls have unlimited upside reward (risk), and net buyers (sellers) of puts have
unlimited downside reward (risk).

At this point, new traders tend to have a common reaction. Why would anyone
ever want to do anything other than buy options? After all, a buyer of options has limited
risk and unlimited profit potential, while a seller of options has limited profit potential
and unlimited risk. Who in their right mind would choose the latter over the former?

The prospect of unlimited risk certainly seems a good reason to avoid a trade.
However, if a trader gives some thought to the matter, he will realize that almost any
trade in a stock or commodity market carries with it unlimited risk. A violent adverse
move which does not give a trader time to cover his position is always possible. Yet
traders take long and short positions in stocks and commodities all the time. The only
explanation must be that they believe the chances of sustaining a catastrophic loss must
be small, so small that the potential profit justifies the risk of unlimited loss,

Option traders learn that the limited or unlimited risk/reward characteristics of a
trade are not the only considerations. At least as important is the probability of that


--- 第 32 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 19

ee
Figure 2-6

10
short a 95 put at 1.55 ~--~-~~~
8+ short a 100 put at 3.70
short a 105 put at 7.10 ———— a

+7.10

Profit

Loss

unlimited profit or loss. As an example, suppose a trader is considering a trade which
has only two possible outcomes. In one case the trader will double his money; in the
other case he will go broke. It may seem that a rational trader will avoid such a trade
because the reward does not appear to justify the risk. But suppose the probability of
the second outcome is only one chance in a million. Suppose in fact that the exact
circumstances which will cause the trader to go broke have never before occurred. Now
how does the trade look? The reward is still limited and the risk unlimited. Yet most
traders would probably make the trade in spite of the potentially disastrous results.

In addition to the potential risk and reward associated with any trade, a trader must
also consider the likelihood of the various outcomes. Is the reward, even a limited one,
Sufficient to offset the risk, albeit an unlimited one? Sometimes it is; sometimes it isn’t.

COMBINATION STRATEGIES

When considering an option trade we need not restrict ourselves to the purchase or sale
Of individual options. We can also combine option positions to form new Positions with
their own unique characteristics. Figure 2-7 shows the profit and loss at expiration from
the combined purchase of a 100 call for 2.70, and a 100 put for 3.70. Here we have
Paid a total of 6.40, which will be our maximum loss if both options expire worthless.
This will happen only if the underlying contract is right at 100 at expiration. If the
Underlying contract is above 100 at expiration the put will be worthless, but the call


--- 第 33 页 ---

20 Chapter 2

Figure 2-7
105

8+ long a 100 call at 2.70
long a 100 put at 3.70

Profit

93.60 100 106.4!

Loss

will act like a long underlying position, gaining one point in value for each point the
underlying contract rises. If the underlying contract is below 100 the call will be
worthless, but the put will act like a short underlying position, gaining one pointin value
for each point the underlying contract falls. In order for the position to do no worse than
break even, it must be worth at least the 6.40 we originally paid. This will occur if either
the 100 call or the 100 put turns out to be worth 6.40. At expiration, the underlying
contract must be at or above 106.40, or at or below 93.60. Outside of this range, the
potential profit is unlimited.

Under what conditions might we initiate the position in Figure 2-7? Such a position
might be sensible if we thought a large move in the underlying contract would take
place in the near future, but were uncertain as to the direction of that move. If the move
were sufficiently large (above 106.40 or below 93.60} the position would be profitable.
Of course we might also take the opposite view, that the underlying contract was
unlikely to either fall below 93.60 or rise above 106.40. Under these conditions we
Might prefer to sell both the 100 call and 100 put (Figure 2-8). Now our profit is limited
to the total premium of 6.40, while our risk in either direction is unlimited. But if we
fee] strongly that the underlying contract is likely to stay in the 93.60-106.40 range
through expiration, the risk might be worth taking.

Suppose we take a view similar to that in Figure 2-8, that the underlying contract
is unlikely to make a big move in either direction. But because there is always a chance


--- 第 34 页 ---

Flementary Strategies 21

ree nO NNO ee
Figure 2-8

short a 100 call at 2.70
87 short a 100 put at 3.70

Profit

Loss

we could be wrong, we might want to increase our margin for error by increasing our
range of profitability beyond the 93.60-106.40 range. Instead of selling a 100 call and
a 100 put, we might sell a 95 put for 1.55 anda 105 call for 1.15. This position (Figure
2-9) will realize its maximum profit of 2.70 anywhere within the 95-105 range, where
both options will expire worthless. We won’t lose money unless the underlying contract
finishes below 92.30 or above 107.70 at expiration. In the former case the 95 put will
be worth at least 2.70, and in the latter case the 105 call will be worth at least 2.70.
There is, as always, a tradeoff for this increased range of profitability. Our maximum
Profit now is only 2.70, whereas in Figure 2-8 it was 6.40. In return for a reduced risk,
we must be satisfied with a reduced profit potential. Option traders are constantly
Tequired to make these types of tradeoffs between risk and reward. If a potential reward
is big enough, it may be worth taking a big risk. But if the potential reward is small, the
accompanying risk should also be small.

The positions in Figures 2-7, 2-8, and 2-9 all have either unlimited reward or
unlimited risk because they are either net long or net short options. If we purchase and
sell equal numbers of options of the same type, we can create positions which have both
limited risk and limited reward. For example, we might buy a 90 call for 9.35 and sell
4 100 call for 2.70, for a total debit of 6.65 (Figure 2-10). If the underlying contract
finishes below 90.00 both options will expire worthless and we will lose our total
Investment of 6.65. If the underlying contract finishes above 100, the 90 call, which


--- 第 35 页 ---

22 Chapter 2

Figure 2-9

10

84 short a 95 put at 1.55
short a 105 call at 1.15

Profit

27

92.30/ 95 fren 105 \107.70
J | a |
0

Loss
$

-10 T T T T T
85 90 95 100 105 110 115

we own, will be worth exactly 10 points more than the 100 call, and we will realize
the maximum profit of 3.35. Between 90 and 100 the position will be worth some
amount between zero and 10 points. In order to do no worse than break even we must
recoup our original investment of 6.65. We will be able to do this if the underlying
contract is at 96.65 or higher at expiration. The 90 call will then be worth at least 6.65.
Like the outright purchase of a call, this position wants the market to rise so that we
will realize our maximum profit of 3.35. Here, however, we are willing to give up the
unlimited upside profit potential associated with the outright purchase of a 90 call, in
return for the partial downside protection afforded by the sale of the 100 call. The
position is bullish, but with both limited risk and limited reward.

If we are bearish on the market we might create a position with limited risk and
limited reward by inverting the position in Figure 2-10. That is, we might sell the 90
call and purchase the 100 call. Now our potential profit is limited to 6.65 if the market
finishes below 90, and our potential loss is limited to 3.35 if the market finishes above
100.

We can also create a bearish position with both limited risk and limited reward by
purchasing a put with a higher exercise price and selling a put with a lower exercise
price. For example, we might buy a 105 put for 7.10 and sell a 100 put for 3.70, for a
total debit of 3.40 (Figure 2-11). If the underlying contract is below 100 at expiration,


--- 第 36 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 23

ee
Figure 2-10

10
long a 90 call at 9.35
8 short a 100 call at 2.70

Profit

+3.35

VY

Loss

85 90 95 100 105 110 115

the 105 put will be worth exactly 5 points more than the 100 put, and we will realize
our maximum profit of 1.60. If the underlying contract is above 105 at expiration, both
options will be worthless and we will lose our entire investment of 3.40. The position
will do no worse than break even if the underlying contract is at or below 101.60, for
then the 105 put will be worth at least 3.40. Like the outright purchase of a put, this
position is bearish. However, we have chosen to give up the unlimited downside profit
potential associated with the outright purchase of the 105 put in return for the partial
upside protection afforded by the sale of the 100 put.

CONSTRUCTING AN EXPIRATION GRAPH

From the foregoing examples, we can formulate some simple rules for drawing expira-
tion profit and loss graphs:

1. If the graph bends, it will do so at an exercise price. Therefore, we can
calculate the profit or loss at each exercise price involved and simply connect these
points with straight lines.

2. If the position is long and short equal numbers of calls (puts), the potential
downside (upside) risk or reward will be equal to the total debit or credit required
to establish the position.


--- 第 37 页 ---

24

Chapter 2

Figure 2-11

Profit

Loss

10

long a 105 put at 7.10
short a 100 put at 3.70

+160f

-10

85

90 95 100 105

3. Above the highest exercise price all calls will go into-the-money, so the entire
position will act like an underlying position which is either long or short underlying
contracts equal to the number of net Jong or short calls. Below the lowest exercise
price all puts will go into-the-money, so the entire position will act like an
underlying position which is either long or short underlying contracts equal to the
number of net long or short puts.

To see how we can use these rules to construct an expiration graph, consider the
following position:

long one 95 call at 5.50
short three 105 calls at 1.15

The first step is to determine the profit or loss at each exercise price (95 and 105).
If the underlying contract finishes at 95, both the 95 and 105 calls will be worthless.
Since the entire position was established for a debit of 2.05 (-5.50 + 3 x 1.15), at 95
the position will show a loss of 2.05. If the underlying contract finishes at 105, the 95
call will be worth 10.00 and the 105 calls will be worthless. Since we own the 95 call,
the position will be worth 10 points less the initial debit of 2.05, or 7.95. We can plot
and connect these two points on a graph (Figure 2-12a).


--- 第 38 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 25

Figure 2-12a
10
84 long 1 March 95 call at 5.50
short 3 March 105 calls at 1.15
64
Al +7.95
ao 4
95 105
0 | |
-27
a
So oad
-64
85
-10 T T r 1 T
85 80 95 100 105 110 115

Next, we note that there are no puts involved in this position, so the maximum
downside loss we can incur is the 2.05 debit required to establish the position. This loss
will occur anywhere below 95 (Figure 2-12b).

Finally, above 105 both the 95 and 105 calls will go into-the-money, so that all
options will begin to act like long underlying contracts. We will be long one underlying
contract in the form of a 95 call, and short three underlying contracts in the form of
three 105 calls. The net result is that above 105 we have a position which is equivalent
to being short two underlying contracts, For each point increase in the price of the
Underlying contract, our position will lose two points {Figure 2-12c).

Applying this method to a more complex example, what would be the expiration
Staph of the following position?

short one 90 call at 9.35

long two 100 calls at 2.70
short four 95 puts at 1.55
long two 100 puts at 3.70


--- 第 39 页 ---

26

Figure 2-12b

Profit

Loss

10

Chapter 2

8-

-10

long 1 March 95 call at 5.50
short 3 March 105 calls at 1.15

96

105

205 { oe |

~~

85

Figure 2-12c

Profit

Loss

10

115

long 1 March 95 call at 5.50
short 3 March 105 calls at 1.15

90 95 100

115



--- 第 40 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 27

First, what happens at the three exercise prices involved? At 90 we have:

90 call 49.35
100 calls 2 x 2.70
95 puts ~4x 3.45
100 puts +2 x 6.30
Total +2.75
At 95 we have:
90 call 44.35
100 calls 2 x 2.70
9S puts +4 x 1.55
100 puts +2 x1.30
Total +7.75
And at 100 we have:
90 call -.65
100 calls -2 x 2.70
95 puts 44x 1.55
100 puts —2 x 3.70
Total -7.25

We can plot and connect these profit and loss points at each of the exercise prices
(Figure 2-138).

Next, below 90 all calls will be worthless and all puts will act like short underlying
contracts. Since the position is net short two puts, the graph will act like a position
which is long two underlying contracts. For each point that the underlying contract falls
below 90, the position will lose two points (Figure 2-13b).

Finally, above 100 all puts will be worthless and all calls will act like long
underlying contracts. Since the position is net long one call, above 100 it will act like a
Position which is long one underlying contract. For each point rise in the underlying
contract, the position will gain one point in value (Figure 2-13c).

Using this method we can draw the expiration profit and loss graph of any position,
No Matter how complex. The position may consist of underlying contracts, and calls and
puts at various exercise prices, But as long as all options expire at the same time, the
Value of the position at expiration will be fully determined by the price of the underlying
contract.

Using options and underlying contracts it is also possible to create positions which
Mimic other option and underlying positions. For example, what are the characteristics
of the following position?

long one 100 call at 2.70
short one 100 put at 3.70



--- 第 41 页 ---

28

Figure 2-13a

Profit

Loss

10

Chapter 2

8-

6

90

v7

short 1 March 90 call at 9.35

long 2 March 100 calls at 2.70
short 4 March 95 puts at 1.55
long 2 March 100 puts at 3.70

+775

-7.25

85 90 95

Figure 2-13b

Profit

Loss

10

115

85

6-

44

100

short 1 March 90 call at 9.35

long 2 March 100 calls at 2.70
short 4 March 95 puts at 1.55
long 2 March 100 puts at 3.70

-B84

-10

85 100

T im
105 110

115



--- 第 42 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 29

Figure 2-13¢
10
short 1 March 90 call at 9.35
84 long 2 March 100 calls at 2.70
short 4 March 95 puts at 1.55.
67 long 2 March 100 puts at 3.70
#4
2
a. 4
2 \ 100
0 -|- -
-24
2 /
3 a4
-64
-8-
-10 T T T T T
85 90 95 100 105 110 115

With the underlying contract above 100 at expiration, the 100 put will be
worthless and the 100 call will act like a long underlying contract. With the underlying
contract below 100 at expiration, the 100 call will be worthless and the 100 put will
act like a short underlying contract. However, since the position is short the 100 put,
when the 100 put is in the money it will act like a long underlying contract. In other
words, this position will mimic a long underlying position regardless of where the
underlying contract is at expiration (Figure 2-14). The only real difference between the
option position and a long position in the underlying contract is that the option position
will create a credit of one point.

Or consider the following position:

long one 90 put at .45
short one 100 call at 2.70
long one underlying contract at 99.00

The value of this position at expiration is given in Figure 2-15. Note the similarity
between this position and the one in Figure 2-10. The only difference appears to be that
We replaced the long 90 call with the combination of a long 90 put and along underlying
Contract. Therefore, a long 90 put and a long underlying contract together must mimic
a long 90 call. As proof, the reader should draw the expiration profit and loss graph of
the following two positions:


--- 第 43 页 ---

30 Chapter 2
Figure 2-14
10
long a 100 call at 2.70 --——-- ¢
8) short a 100 put at 3.70 ~-~-- “
combined position vA
67 ra
5 44 >
* 24 +3.70
04 ae
anol
-24
ry ~~, ;
a
So -ay
67
-10 T T T T T
85 90 95 100 105 110 115
Figure 2-15
10
34 long a 90 put at .45
short a 100 call at 2.70
64 long an underlying contract at 99.00
e 4 >
fe)
. \
= 90 100 f +3.26
B 6.75
oO
3 .44
-65
~~
8-4
-10 T t T T T
85 90 95 100 105 110 115



--- 第 44 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 31

1. longa 90 call at 9.35
2. longa 90 put at .45 and long an underlying contract at 99.00

Although there will be a small difference in the profit and loss to each position, both
positions will have graphs with the same general shape.

The reader who is new to options may find it useful to sit down with the business
section of a newspaper and create and graph a variety of option and underlying
positions. This will enable him to become comfortable with many of the concepts
introduced in the first two chapters, and will make the subsequent material that much
easier to understand. Typical newspaper listings for futures options and stock options
are shown in Figure 2-16.

While elementary strategies such as the ones discussed in this chapter are a
convenient method of introducing the new trader to basic option characteristics, in
actual practice it is very unlikely that a trader will put on a position and let it go to
expiration. Even if he were to initiate a position with such an intent, he would be foolish
indeed to simply walk away from the position and come back at expiration to find out
whether he had made or lost money. As market conditions change, a position which
seemed sensible yesterday may not seem quite so sensible today. Based on new
conditions the trader may want to—indeed, may have to—alter his strategy. This is true
for all traders, not just for option traders. A trader who buys stock in the belief that it
will rise would be foolish not to reassess his position if the stock were to unexpectedly
drop several points. An option trader who sells 105 calls in the belief that the underlying
contract will never rise above 105 would likewise be foolish not to reassess the situation
if the underlying contract were to make a rapid upward move from 99 to 104. He may
Still believe that the underlying contract will not rise above 105, but he is unlikely to
have the same degree of confidence. Every trader reserves the right to make a more
intelligent decision today than he made yesterday.

The serious trader must be able to identify potentially profitable strategies given
current market conditions. But he must also be able to adjust to changing market
conditions and to take protective measures when the market moves adversely. In the
next chapter we will begin our investigation of basic option pricing theory, and show
how this theory can be used to help a trader achieve these goals.

e—
2. In the United States, nvestor’s Business Daily, the New York Times, and The Wall Street Journalall
Carry extensive listings of exchange traded futures options and stock options.


--- 第 45 页 ---

32

Figure 2-16

Futures and Futures Options
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1993

Chapter 2

Futures
-Lifetime-
Month Open High Low Settle Change High Low
CORN (CBT); 5,000 bushels; ¢ per bushel (1 = $50.00)
Dec 255", 256 253'/, 253'/, -2"h, 2667, 225°,
Mar94 ss: 263 264'/, 261'/, 261'/, -2'1, 266, 232",
May 267', 268'/, 265 265'/, 3 2707, 238°,
Jul 268'/, 270 266, 266%, -3'/, 2707, 241
Sep 260 2604s, 2571, 257'/, “3's, 2617, 240",
Dec 251", 253 249 249'/, 3, 255 236"/,
EURODOLLARS (CME); $1,000,000; points of 100% (.01 = $25.00)
Dec 96.50 96.52 96.48 96.49 -.02 96.61 90.22
Mar94 «96.50 96.52 96.46 96.47 -.04 96.62 90.28
Jun 96.30 96.31 96.24 96.25 -.05 96.75 90.40
Sep 96.06 96.10 96.02 96.03 -.06 96.24 90.36
Dec 95.70 95.73 95.65 95.66 -.05 95.87 90.74
Mar95 —s_«95.62 95.65 95.57 95.58 -.05 95.80 95.24
Jun 95.42 95.44 95.37 95.37 -.05 95.60 95.74
Sep 95.25 95.27 95.20 95.20 -.05 95.43 91.34
Dec 94.97 94.98 94.91 94.91 -.06 95.81 91.18
GERMAN BONDS (LIFFE); DM 250,000; points of 100% (.01 = DM 25.00)
Dec 100.13 100.50 100.03 100.46 +29 100.58 94.25
Mar94 100.26 «= 100.55 100.21 100.56 +.30 100.66 97.30
A 100.46 +.27 100.49 98.94
CRUDE OIL (NYMEX); 1,000 barrels; $ per barrel (.01 = $10.00)
Dec 16.37 18.43 18.02 16.07 -.28 23.00 = 17.14
Jan94.— 18.47 18.57 16.18 18.22 -.26 21.15 17.40
Feb tee 18.64 18.36 16.37 -.25 20.81 17.64
Mar 18.71 18.74 18.48 16.50 “22 21.10 17.86
Apr 18.78 18.83 18.58 16.61 -.24 20.86 16.05
May 418.90 18.91 18.72 16.72 -.20 21.07 18.20
Jun 49.01 19.02 18.80 16.82 -.19 21.35 = 18.31
Jul 19.07 19.08 16.89 18.89 18 20.78 18.50
AUG eaters esate 18.96 “17 20.78 18.72



--- 第 46 页 ---

Elementary Strategies 33
Figure 2-16 (continued)

Futures and Futures Options
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1993

Futures Options

Strike
Price Calls-Settle Puts-Settle
CORN OPTIONS (CBT)
Dec Mar May Dec Mar May
230 23°, 314, 35%, vA " ‘I,
240 14%, 2271, 251, WA 1 471,
250 6, 1471, 18 "l, 3 3%, 3%,
260 2, 9", 121, 8's, 74, 7,
270 wa 5°, 84, 17 13%, 13
280 ‘, 3, 5", 26 tae
290 vA 1", 3%, 5
300 , "I, 2 vee nana
EURODOLLAR OPTIONS (CME)
Dec Mar Jun Dec Mar Jun
95.25 1.26 1.26 1.07 cab cab 04
95.50 1.01 1.01 84 cab 041 05
95.75 75 77 62 cab .02 09
96.00 51 54 43 01 .04 5
96.25 27 30 26 02 06 24
96.50 08 +13 -13 .08 AT 37
96.75 01 03 05 25 32 50
97.00 cab 04 01 49 500
GERMAN BOND OPTIONS (LIFFE)
Dec Mar Jun Dec Mar Jun
98.50 1.99 2.3300 0 ou. .03 yy re
99.00 1.62 194 ou .06 BB le
99.50 1.11 168 uae 15 52 ase
100.00 72 1.280 .26 ff
100.50 44 9.04 see 48 95 weoee
101.00 24 4: en .78 1.2300; ue
101.50 13 i) en 1.17 1.51
102.00 07 Me 1.51 1.85
CRUDE OIL OPTIONS (NYMEX)
Dec Jan Feb Dec Jan Feb
15.00 3.08 ase sae 04 .03 06
16.00 2.09 asset 02 .08 13
17.00 1.14 Ps |: 07 18 27
18.00 35 65 92 28 43 55
19.00 .06 .24 44 99 1.02 1.07
20.00 02 .09 .20 1.95 1.86 1.62
21.00 04 03 .07 2.94 2.80 vane
22.00 041 01 04 3.93 tse

eee


--- 第 47 页 ---

34

Figure 2-16 (continued)

S&P 100 INDEX-OEX 424.15 (CBOE)
Strike Calls-Last
Price Nov Dec Jan
Sree
395 297/, 30 sane
400 28 'f, 29 "|, uu
405 >) i rn 25 *),
410 18 18 20 */,
415 LA kh
420 7, 9°, 121,
425 4 6%, 10 7/,
430 4°70, 4", 6%,
435 1, 2°), 571,
440 "Ie 1, 241,
445 vA " 2‘,
450 Ie " 1 Ne
455 Ns " ‘h,
IBM 44%, (CBOE)
Strike Caiis-Last
Price Nov Jan Apr
BE aca seees 10 "/,
40 4°f, 5%, 7h,
45 1, 2" 3°,
50 “he "he 471,
55 ‘ie t, ",
MOTOROLA 103'/, (AMEX)
Strike Calls-Last
Price Nov Dec Jan
90 13°, ; ky re
95 9‘, 40 4, 14,
100 5°), 7 8
105 2°, 4%, 5 "I,
110 1 2%, 3
115 ", 1 2",

Equity Options

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1993

Puts-Last

Chapter 2


--- 第 48 页 ---

So 3 eo

Introduction to
Theoretical Pricing Models

Tn the last chapter we looked at some of the simple option strategies a trader might
initiate given an opinion on an underlying contract’s likely price movement. Whatever
the basis for the opinion, it will probably be expressed with terms such as “good
chance,” “highly likely,” “possible,” “improbable,” etc. The problem with this approach
is that opinions cannot easily be expressed in numerical terms. What do we really mean
by “good chance”? Or by “highly unlikely”? If we want to approach option markets
logically we will need some method of quantifying our opinions about price movements.

From the elementary strategies discussed in the previous chapter it is clear that the
direction in which the underlying market moves can have a significant effect on the
profitability of an option strategy. Consequently, option traders are sensitive to the
direction in which the underlying market moves. But an option trader has an additional
problem: the speed of the market. A commodity trader who believes a commodity will
rise in price within a specified period can be reasonably certain of making a profit if he
is right. He simply buys the commodity, waits for it to reach his target price, then sells
the commodity for a profit.

The situation is not quite so simple for an option trader. Suppose a trader believes
a commodity will rise in price from $100, its present price, to $120 within the next five
months. Suppose also that a $110 call expiring in three months is available at a price of
$4, If the commodity rises to $120 by expiration, the purchase of the $110 will result
in a profit of $6 ($10 intrinsic value less the $4 cost of the option). But is this profit a
certainty? What will happen if the price of the commodity remains below $110 for the
next three months and only reaches $120 after the option expires? Then the option will
expire worthless and the trader will lose his $4 investment.

Perhaps the trader would do better to purchase a $110 call which expires in six
months rather than three months. Now he can be certain that when the commodity
Teaches $120, the call will be worth at least $10 in intrinsic value. But what if the price
of the six-month option is $12? In that case the trader might still show a loss. Even
though the underlying commodity reaches the target price of $120, there is no
Guarantee that the $110 call will ever be worth more than its $10 intrinsic value.

; A trader in an underlying market is almost exclusively interested in the direction
iM which the market will move. While the option trader is also sensitive to directional
Considerations, he must also give careful consideration to how fast the market is likely

35


--- 第 49 页 ---

36 Chapter 3

to move. If a futures trader and an option trader take long market positions in their
respective instruments, and the market does in fact move higher, the futures trader is
assured of a profit while the option trader may show a loss. If the market fails to move
sufficiently fast, the favorable directional move may not be enough to offset the option’s
loss in time value. This is the primary reason speculators generally lose in option
markets. A speculator usually buys options for their seemingly favorable risk/reward
characteristics (limited risk/unlimited reward). But if he purchases options, not only
must he be right about market direction, he must also be right about market speed. Only
if he is right on both counts can he expect to make a profit. If predicting the correct
market direction is difficult, correctly predicting direction and speed is probably beyond
most traders’ capabilities.

The concept of speed is vital in trading options. It is so important that there are
many option strategies which depend only on the speed of the underlying market and
not at all on its direction. Indeed, ifa trader is highly proficient at predicting directional
moves in the underlying market, he is probably better advised to stick to the underlying
instrument. It is only when he has some feel for the speed component that a trader can
hope to intelligently enter the option market.

The option trader who wants to intelligently evaluate the potential profitability of
an option trade is faced with the task of analyzing several different factors. At a
minimum he must consider:

1. The price of the underlying contract

2. The exercise price

3. The amount of time remaining to expiration

4. The direction in which he expects the underlying market to move
5. The speed at which he expects the underlying market to move

Ideally, he would like to express each of these factors numerically, feed the
numbers into a formula, and derive a value for the option. By comparing the value to
its price in the marketplace, the trader would then know whether the purchase or sale
of the option was likely to be profitable. This is essentially the goal of option evaluation:
to analyze an option based on the terms of the option contract, as well as current market
conditions and future expectations.

EXPECTED RETURN

Suppose we are given the opportunity to roll a six-sided die, and each time we roll we
will receive a dollar amount equal to the number which comes up. If we roll a one, we
get $1; if we roll a two, we get $2; and so on up to six, in which case we get $6. If we
were to roll the die an infinite number of times, on average, how much would we expect
to receive per roll?

We can calculate the answer using some simple arithmetic. There are six numbers
which can come up, each with equal probability. If we add up the six possible outcomes


--- 第 50 页 ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 37

14+2+3+44+5+6=21 and divide this by the six faces of the die we get 21/6 = 314. That
is, on average we can expect to get back $312 each time we roll the die. This is the
average, or expected, retum. If someone were to charge us for the privilege of rolling
the die, what might we be willing to pay? If we purchased the chance to roll the die for
less than $31, in the long run we would expect to be winners. If we paid more than
$31, in the long run we would expect to be losers. And if we paid exactly $312, we
would expect to break even. Note the qualifying phrase “in the long run.” The expected
return of $314 isa realistic goal only if we are allowed to roll the die many, many times.
If we are allowed to roll only once, we cannot count on getting back $34. Indeed, on
any one roll it is impossible to get back $314 since no face of the die has exactly 314
spots. Nevertheless, if we pay less than $314 for even one roll of the die, the laws of
probability are on our side because we have paid less than the expected return.

Ina similar vein, consider a roulette bet. A roulette wheel has 38 slots, numbered
1 through 36, 0 and 00.! Suppose a casino allows a player to choose a number. If the
player’s number comes up, he receives $36; if any other number comes up, he receives
nothing. What is the expected return from this proposition? There are 38 slots on the
roulette wheel, each with equal probability, but only one slot will return $36 to the
player. If we divide the one way to win $36 by the 38 slots on the wheel, the result is
$36/38 = $.9474, or about 95¢. A player who pays 95¢ for the privilege of picking a
number at the roulette table can expect to break about even in the long run.

Of course, no casino will let a player buy such a bet for 95¢. Under those conditions
the casino would make no profit. In the real world, a player who wants to purchase
such a bet will have to pay more than the expected return, typically $1. The 5¢
difference between the $1 price of the bet and the 95¢ expected return represents the
profit potential, or edge, to the casino. In the long run, for every dollar bet at the roulette
table, the casino can expect to keep about 5¢.

Given the above conditions, any player interested in making a profit would rather
switch places with the casino so that he could be the house. Then he would have a 5¢
edge on his side by selling bets worth 95¢ for $1. Alternatively, the player would like
to find a casino where he could purchase the bet for less than its expected return of 95¢,
perhaps 88¢. Then the player would have a 7¢ edge over the casino.

THEORETICAL VALUE

The theoretical value of a proposition is the price one would expect to pay in order to
just break even in the long run. Thus far the only factor we have considered in
determining the value of a proposition is the expected return. We used this concept to
calculate the 95¢ fair price for the roulette bet. There may, however, be other
Considerations,

Suppose that in our roulette example the casino decides to change the conditions
of the bet slightly. The player may now purchase the roulette bet for its expected return
e_—,_

1. Asis customary in the U.S., we assume a roulette wheel with 38 slots. In some parts of the world the
toulette wheel may have no slot 00. This of course changes the odds.


--- 第 51 页 ---

38 Chapter 3

of 95¢ and, as before, if he loses the casino will immediately collect his 95¢. Under the
new conditions, however, if the player wins the casino will send him his $36 winnings
in two months. Will both the player and the casino still break even on the proposition?

Where did the player get the 95¢ he used to place his bet at the roulette wheel? In
the immediate sense he may have taken it out of his pocket. But a closer examination
may reveal that he withdrew the money from his savings account prior to visiting the
casino. Since he won’t receive his winnings for two months, he will have to take into
consideration the two months interest he would have earned had he left the 95¢ in his
savings account. If interest rates are 12% annually (1% per month), the interest loss is
2% Xx 95¢, or about 2¢. If the player purchases the bet for its expected return of 95¢,
he will still be a 2¢ loser because of the cost of carrying a 95¢ debit for two months.
The casino, on the other hand, will take the 95¢, put it in an interest-bearing account,
and at the end of two months collect 2¢ in interest.

Under these new conditions the theoretical value of the bet is the expected return
of 95¢ less the 2¢ carrying cost on the bet, or about 93¢. If a player pays 93¢ for the
roulette bet today and collects his winnings in two months, neither he nor the casino
can expect to make any profit in the long run.

The two most common considerations in a financial investment are the expected
return and carrying costs. There may, however, be other considerations. For example,
suppose the casino decided to send the player a 1¢ bonus over the next two months.
He could then add this additional payment to the previous theoretical value of 93¢ to
get a new theoretical value of 94¢. This is similar to the dividend paid to owners of stock
in a company. And, in fact, dividends are an additional consideration in evaluating
options on stock.

Exchanges will perhaps object to the casino analogy. They prefer that option trading
not be thought of as gambling. There is certainly no desire here to assess the moral
implications of either gambling or option trading. The fact remains that the same laws
of probability which enable a casino to set the odds for different games of chance are
the same laws of probability which enable a trader to evaluate an option.

The concept of theoretical value based on probability is common in many aspects
of business. For those uncomfortable with the gambling analogy, one can go back to the
original justification for options and think of them as insurance policies which require
the payment of a premium. Through the use of statistical data and probability theory,
an actuary at an insurance company will attempt to calculate the likelihood that the
insurance company will have to make good on an insurance policy. He can then factor
into the equation what the insurance company expects to earn on premium payments,
and thereby arrive at a theoretical value for the insurance policy. The policy can then
be offered to prospective customers at an additional cost, which represents the theoreti-
cal edge to the insurance company.

In the same way, the goal of option evaluation is to determine, through the use of
theoretical pricing models, the theoretical value of an option. The trader can then make
an intelligent decision whether the option is overpriced or underpriced in the market-
place, and whether the theoretical edge is sufficient to justify going into the marketplace
and making a trade.


--- 第 52 页 ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 39

A WORD ON MODELS

Before continuing, a few observations on models in general will be worthwhile.

A model is a scaled down or more easily managed representation of the real world.
The model may be a physical one, such as a model airplane or building, or it may be a
mathematical one, such as a formula. In each case, the model is constructed to help us
petter understand the world in which we live. However, it is unwise, and sometimes
dangerous, to assume that the model and the real world which it represents are
identical in every way. They may be very similar, but the model is unlikely to exactly
duplicate every feature of the real world.

All models, if they are to be effective, require us to make certain prior assumptions
about the real world. Mathematical models require the input of numbers which quantify
these assumptions. If we feed incorrect data into the model, we can expect an incorrect
representation of the real world. Every model user must be aware: garbage in, garbage
out.

These general observations about models are no less true for option pricing models.
An option model is only someone’s idea of how options might be evaluated under
certain conditions. Since either the model itself, or the data which we feed into the
model, might be incorrect, there is no guarantee that model-generated values will be
accurate, nor can we be sure that these values will bear any logical resemblance to actual
prices in the marketplace.

There is in fact a great deal of disagreement among traders as to the usefulness of
option pricing models. Some traders feel that models are so much hocus-pocus, and have
no relationship to what goes on in the real world. Other traders feel that once they have
a sheet of theoretical values in hand all their problems are solved. The reality lies
somewhere in between.

Anew option trader is like someone entering a dark room for the first time, Without
any guidance he will grope in the dark and may eventually find what he is looking for.
The trader who is armed with a basic understanding of theoretical pricing models enters
the same room with a small candle. He can make out the general layout of the room,
but the dimness of the candle prevents him from distinguishing every detail. Moreover,
some of what he does see may be distorted by the flickering candle. In spite of these
limitations, a trader is more likely to find what he is looking for with a small candle than
with no illumination at all.

The reat problems with theoretical pricing models arise after the trader has acquired
some sophistication. As he gains confidence he may begin to increase the size of his
trades. When this happens, his inability to make out every detail in the room, as well as
the distortions caused by the flickering candle flame, take on increased importance.
Now a misinterpretation of what he thinks he sees can lead to financial disaster, since
any error in judgement will be greatly magnified.

The sensible approach is to make use of a model, but with a full awareness of what
it can and cannot do. Option traders will find that theoretical pricing models are
invaluable tools to understanding the pricing of options. Because of the insights gained
from a model, the great majority of successful option traders rely on some type of


--- 第 53 页 ---

40 Chapter 3

theoretical pricing model. However, an option trader, if he is to make the best use of a
theoretical pricing model, must be aware of its limitations as well as its strengths.
Otherwise he may be no better off than the trader groping in the dark.2

A SIMPLE APPROACH

How might we adapt the concepts of expected return and theoretical value to the
pricing of options? We might begin by calculating the expected return for an option.
Let’s take a simple example.

Suppose an underlying contract is trading at $100 and that on a certain date in the
future, which we will call expiration, the contract can take on one of five different
prices: $80, $90, $100, $110, or $120. Assume, moreover, that each of the five prices
is equally likely with 20% probability. The prices and probabilities might be represented
by the line in Figure 3-1.

If we take a long position in the underlying contract at today’s price of $100, what
will be the expected return from this position at expiration? 20% of the time we will
lose $20 when the contract ends up at $80. 20% of the time we will lose $10 when the
contract ends up at $90. 20% of the time we will break even when the contract ends
up at $100. 20% of the time we will make $10 when the contract ends up at $110. And
20% of the time we will make $20 when the contract ends up at $120. We can write
the arithmetic:

~(20% x $20) -(20% x $10) +(20% x 0} +(20% x $10) +(20% x $20) = 0

Since the profits and losses exactly offset each other, the expected return to the
long position is zero. The same reasoning will show that the expected return to a short
position taken at the current price of $100 is also zero. Given the prices and prob-
abilities, if we take either a long or short position we can expect to just break even in
the long run.

Now suppose that we take a long position in a $100 call. Forgetting for a moment
about what we might pay for the call, what will be the expected return given the prices
and probabilities in Figure 3-1? If the underlying contract finishes at $80, $90, or $100
the call will expire worthless. If the underlying contract finishes at $110 or $120 the
call will be worth $10 and $20, respectively. The arithmetic is:

(20% x 0) +(20% x 0} +(20% x 0) +(20% x $10) +(20% x $20) = +86

Figure 3-1

$80 $90 $100 $110 $120
20% 20% 20% 20% 20%

2. Two interesting articles discuss these limitations:
Figlewski, Stephen; “What Does an Option Pricing Model Tell Us about Option Prices?,” Finaneial
Analysts Journal, Septeraber/October 1989, pages 12-15.
Black, Fischer; “Living Up to the Model,” Risk, Vol. 3, No. 3., March 1990, pages 11-13.


--- 第 54 页 ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 41

The call can never be worth less than zero, so the expected return from the call
position is always a non-negative number, in this case $6.

If we want to develop a theoretical pricing model using this approach, we might
propose a series of possible prices and probabilities for the underlying contract at
expiration. Then, given an exercise price, we can calculate the value of the option at
each price outcome, multiply the value by its associated probability, add up all these
numbers, and thereby obtain an expected return for the option.

In the foregoing example we took a very simple situation with only five possible
price outcomes, each with identical probability. What changes might we make in order
to develop a more realistic model? For one thing, we would have to know the settlement
procedure for the option. In the United States, all options are subject to stock-type
settlement, which requires full payment for the option. If the $100 call will have an
expected return of $6 at expiration, we will have to deduct the carrying costs to get its
value today. If interest rates are 12% annually (1% per month) and the option will expire
in two months, we will have to discount the $6 expected return by the 2% carrying
cost, or about 12¢. The theoretical value of the option will then be $5.88.

What other factors might we have to consider? We assumed that all five price
outcomes were equally likely. Is this a realistic assumption? Suppose you were told that
only two possible prices were possible at expiration, $110 and $250. With the
underlying contract at $100 today, which do you think is more likely? Based on
experience, most traders would probably agree that extreme price changes which are
far away from today’s price are less likely than small changes which remain close to
today’s price. For this reason, $110 is more likely than $250. To take this into
consideration, perhaps our price outcomes, in terms of probability, ought to be concen-
trated around the present price of the underlying contract. Such a distribution is shown
in Figure 3-2. Now the expected return from a $100 call is:

(10% x 0) +(20% x 0} +(40% x 0) +(20% x $10) +(10% x $20} = $4.00

If, as before, the option is subject to stock-type settlement and carrying costs are
2%, the theoretical value of the option will now be $3.92.

Note that in Figure 3-2 all outcomes and probabilities are arranged symmetrically.
Even though the new probabilities altered the expected return for the $100 call, the
expected return from any position taken in the underlying contractis still zero. For each
upward price move, there isa downward move of equal magnitude and probability. We
Might, however, believe that the expected return to an underlying contract is not zero,
that there is a greater chance that the contract will move one direction rather than
another. Look at the price outcomes and probabilities in Figure 3-3. Using these new
probabilities, the expected return from a long position in the underlying contract is:

—(10% x $20) -(20% x $10} +(30% x 0) +(25% x $10) +(15% x $20) = +$1.50
and the expected return for the $100 call is:
(10% x 0} +(20% x 0) +(30% x 0) +(25% x $10) +(15% x $20) = +$5.50


--- 第 55 页 ---

42 Chapter 3

Figure 3-2
$80 $90 $100 $110 $120
10% 20% 40% 20% 10%
Figure 3-3
$80 $90 $100 $110 $120
10% 20% 30% 25% 15%

Note that the underlying contract now has a positive expected return, so it may seem
that there is money to be made simply by purchasing the underlying contract. This
would be true if there were no other considerations. But suppose the underlying
contract is a stock, and therefore subject to stock-type settlement. If we purchase the
stock at today’s price of $100 and hold it for some period, there is a carrying cost
associated with the investment. If the carrying cost is exactly equal to the expected
return of $1.50, we will just break even. For a long stock position to be profitable, the
stock must appreciate by at least the amount of carrying costs over the holding period.
Therefore, the expected return from the stock must be some positive number. If we
assume that any stock trade will just break even, the expected return must be equal to
the carrying costs.

Some stocks also pay dividends. If the dividend is paid during the holding period,
it will affect the expected return. A trader who buys stock will have to pay out carrying
costs, but he will receive the dividends. If we again assume thata stock trade will break
even, the expected return at the end of the holding period must be identical to the
cartying costs less the dividend. If the carrying cost for the stock over some period is
$3.50, and a $1.00 dividend is expected during this period, the expected return at the
end of the period must be $2.50. A trader who purchases the stock today will incur an
interest debit of $3.50 at the end of the holding period, but this will be exactly offset by
the $1.00 dividend which he receives during the holding period,® as well as the $2.50
expected return at the end of the period.

Inan arbitrage-jree market, where no profit can be made by either buying or selling
a contract, all credits and debits, including the expected return, must exactly cancel out.
If we assume an arbitrage-free market, we must necessarily assume that the forward
price, the average price of the contract at the end of the holding period, is the current
price, plus an expected return which will exactly offset all other credits and debits. If
the holding costs on a $100 stock over some period are $4, the forward price must be
$104, If the stock also pays a $1 dividend, the forward price must be $103. In both
cases the credits and debits will exactly cancel out.

The calculation of a forward price depends on the characteristics of the contract as
well as market conditions. In the case of a stock, the considerations are the price of the

3. The trader can also earn interest on the dividend from the time he receives it until the end of the holding
period. Since this will usually be a very small amount in relation to the other factors, we will ignore it.


--- 第 56 页 ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 43

stock, the length of the holding period, interest rates, and dividends. In the case of a
futures contract, the situation is much simpler. A futures contract requires no initial cash
outlay, since it is subject to futures-type settlement. Moreover, a futures contract does
not pay dividends. This means that the forward price of a futures contract in an
arbitrage-free market is simply the current price of the futures contract. If a trader buys
a futures contract at $100, the break even price for the contract at the end of the holding
period is $100.

Going back to our very simple pricing model, we might make the assumption that
the underlying market is arbitrage-free,4 that there is no money to be made from trading
the underlying contract. The expected return must then be equal to the difference
between the current price of the underlying market and its forward price. In the case of
stock, the expected return will be carrying costs less dividends. In the case of futures,
the expected return will be zero.

Even if we assume an arbitrage-free market in the underlying, with appropriate
probabilities associated with each price outcome, we still have one major problem. In
our simplified model there were only five possible price outcomes, while in the real
world there are an infinite number of possibilities. To enable our model to more closely
approximate real world conditions we will have to construct a probability line with
every possible price outcome and its associated probability. This may seem an impossible
task, but it is the basis for all theoretical pricing models.

We can now summarize the necessary steps in developing a model:

1. Propose a series of possible prices at expiration for the underlying contract
2. Assign an appropriate probability to each possible price

3. Maintain an arbitrage-free underlying market
4

From the prices and probabilities in steps 1, 2, and 3, calculate the expected
return for the option

5. From the option’s expected return, deduct the carrying cost

If we can accomplish all this, we will finally have a theoretical value from which we can
begin to trade.

Prior to 1973, evaluation of options required the solution of complex mathematical
equations. Since such methods were slow and tedious, a trader who tried to use them
quickly found that profit opportunities disappeared faster than the evaluation methods
could identify them. In 1973, concurrent with the opening of the Chicago Board
Options Exchange, Fischer Black and Myron Scholes introduced the first practical
theoretical pricing model for options. The Black-Scholes Model, with its relatively
simple arithmetic and limited number of inputs, most of which were easily observable,
proved an ideal tool for traders in the newly opened U.S. option market. Although other
Models have since been introduced to overcome some of its original deficiencies, the
Black-Scholes Model remains the most widely used of all option pricing models.

4. We need not necessarily asstime an arbitrage free underlying market. But we shall see that this is an
important assumption in most theoretical pricing models.


--- 第 57 页 ---

44 Chapter 3

In its original form, the Black-Scholes Model was intended to evaluate European
options (no early exercise permitted) on non-dividend paying stocks. Shortly after its
introduction, realizing that most stocks do pay dividends, Black and Scholes added a
dividend component. In 1976, Fischer Black made slight modifications to the model to
allow for the evaluation of options on futures contracts. And in 1983, Mark Garman
and Steven Kohlhagen made several other modifications to allow for the evaluation of
options on foreign currencies.° The futures version and the foreign currency version are
known officially as the Black Model and the Garman-Kohthagen Model, respectively.
But the evaluation method in each version, whether the original Black-Scholes Model
for stock options, the Black Model for futures options, or the Garman-Kohthagen Model
for foreign currency options, is so similar that they have all come to be known as simply
the Black-Scholes Model. The various forms of the model differ primarily in how they
calculate the forward price of the underlying contract, and an option trader will simply
choose the form appropriate to the underlying instrument.

The great majority of options currently traded are American options, carrying with
them the right of early exercise. For this reason, it may seem that the Black-Scholes
model, with its assumption of no early exercise, is poorly suited for use in most markets.
However, the Black-Scholes Model has proven so easy to use that many traders do not
believe the more accurate values derived from an American option pricing model, which
allows for the possibility of early exercise, is worth the additional effort. In some
markets, particularly futures options markets, the additional early exercise value is so
small that there is virtually no difference between values obtained from the Black-
Scholes model and values obtained from an American pricing model.

Due to its widespread use and its importance in the development of other pricing
models, we will for the moment restrict ourselves to a discussion of the Black-Scholes
model and its various forms. In later chapters we will consider the question of early
exercise. We will also look at alternative methods for pricing options when we question
some of the basic assumptions in the Black-Scholes Model.

The reasoning which led to the development of the Black-Scholes Model depends
on the five steps we listed earlier in this chapter when we proposed a simple method
for evaluating options. Black and Scholes worked originally with call values, but put
values can be derived in much the same way. Alternatively, we will see in Chapter 11
that in an arbitrage-free market there is a unique relationship between an underlying
contract, and a call and put with the same exercise price and expiration date. This
relationship enables us to derive a put value simply by knowing the associated call value.

In order to calculate an option’s theoretical value using the Black-Scholes Model,
we need to know at a minimum five characteristics of the option and its underlying
contract. These are:

1. The option’s exercise price

2. The amount of time remaining to expiration

5. We are speaking here of options on a physical foreign currency, rather than options on a foreign
currency futures contract. The latter may be evaluated using the Black Model for futures options.


--- 第 58 页 ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 45

3. The current price of the underlying contract
4, The risk-free interest rate over the life of the option
5. The volatility of the underlying contract

The last input, volatility, may be unfamiliar to the new trader. While we will put
off a detailed discussion of this input to the next chapter, from our previous discussion
one can reasonably infer that volatility is related to the speed of the market.

If we know each of the required inputs, we can feed them into the theoretical
pricing model and thereby generate a theoretical value.

Black and Scholes also incorporated into their model the concept of the riskless
hedge. For every option position there is a theoretically equivalent position in the
underlying contract such that, for small price changes in the underlying contract, the
option position will gain or lose value at exactly the same rate as the underlying position.
To take advantage of a theoretically mispriced option, it is necessary to establish a hedge
by offsetting the option position with this theoretically equivalent underlying position.
That is, whatever option position we take, we must take an opposing market position
in the underlying contract. The correct proportion of underlying contracts needed to
establish this riskless hedge is known as the hedge ratio.

Why is it necessary to establish a riskless hedge? Recall that in our simplified
approach an option’s theoretical value depended on the probability of various price
outcomes for the underlying contract. As the underlying contract changes in price, the
probability of each outcome will also change. If the underlying price is currently $100
and we assign a 25% probability to $120, we might drop the probability for $120 to
10% if the price of the underlying contract falls to $80. By initially establishing a riskless
hedge, and then by adjusting this hedge as market conditions change, we are taking into
consideration these changing probabilities.

In this sense an option can be thought of as a substitute for a similar position in the
underlying contract. A call is a substitute for a long position; a put is a substitute for a
short position. Whether it is better to take the position in the option or in the underlying

Figure 3-4

Exercise Price

Time to Expiration

Theoretical » Theoreticai

Underlying Price Pricing Model Value

Interest Rates

Volatility



--- 第 59 页 ---

46 Chapter 3

contract depends on the theoretical value of the option and its price in the marketplace,
If a call can be purchased (sold) for less (more) than its theoretical value, it will, in the
long run, be more profitable to take a long (short) market position by purchasing (selling)
calls than by purchasing (selling) the underlying contract. In the same way, if a put can
be purchased (sold) for less (more} than its theoretical value, it will, in the long run, be
more profitable to take a short (jong) market position by purchasing (selling) puts than
by selling (buying) the underlying contract.

Since the theoretical value obtained from a theoretical pricing model is no better
than the inputs into the model, a few comments on each of the inputs will be
worthwhile.

EXERCISE PRICE

There ought never be any doubt about the exercise price of an option, since it is fixed
in the terms of the contract and does not vary over the life of the contract.© A
Deutschemark March 58 call traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange cannot
suddenly turn into March 59 call or a March 57 call. An IBM July 55 put traded on the
Chicago Board Options Exchange cannot turn into a July 50 put or a July 60 put.

TIME TO EXPIRATION

Like the exercise price, the option’s expiration date is fixed and will not vary. Our DM
March 58 call will not suddenly turn into an April 58 call, nor will our IBM July 55 put
turn into a June 55 put. Of course, each day that passes brings us closer to expiration,
so in that sense the time to expiration is constantly growing shorter. However, the
expiration date, like the exercise price, is fixed by the exchange and will not change.

Time to expiration, like all inputs in the Black-Scholes Model, is entered as an
annualized number. If we are entering raw data directly into the model we must make
the appropriate annualization. With 91 days remaining to expiration, we would enter
an input of .25 (91/365 = .25). With 36 days remaining, we would enter .10 (36/365
= .10). However, most option evaluation computer programs already have this transfor-
mation incorporated into the software so that we need only enter the correct number
of days remaining to expiration.

It may seem that we have a problem in deciding what number of days to enter into
the model. We need the amount of time remaining to expiration for two purposes, to
calculate the interest considerations and to calculate the likelihood of movement in the
underlying contract. For volatility purposes in assessing the “speed” of the market we
are only interested in trading days. Only on those days can the price of the underlying
contract actually change. This might lead us to drop weekends and holidays from our
calculations. On the other hand, for interest rate purposes we must include every day.

6. It Js true that an exchange may adjust the exercise price of a stock option if there is a stock split. In
practical terms this is not really a change in the exercise price because the exercise price retains the
same relationship to the stock price. The characteristics of the option contract remain essentially
unchanged.


--- 第 60 页 ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 47

If we borrow or lend money we expect the interest to accrue every day, no matter that
some of the days are not business days.

It turns out that this is not really a problem. In calculating the “speed” of the market
we observe only the price changes that occur on business days. But we can make slight
changes to this observed value and annualize the number before feeding it into the
theoretical pricing model, The result is that we can feed into our model the actual
number of days remaining to expiration knowing that the model will interpret the
number correctly.

PRICE OF THE UNDERLYING

Unlike the exercise price and time to expiration, the correct price of the underlying is
not always obvious. At any one time there is usually a bid price and an asked price, and
it may not be clear whether we ought to use one or the other of these prices, or perhaps
some price in between.

We have noted that the correct use of an option’s theoretical value requires us to
hedge the option position with an opposing trade in the underlying contract. Therefore
the underlying price we feed into our theoretical pricing model ought to be the price at
which we believe we can make the opposing trade. If we intend to purchase calls or sell
puts, both of which are long market positions, we will have to hedge by selling the
underlying contract. In that case we ought to use the bid price since that is the price at
which we can sell the underlying. On the other hand, if we intend to sell calls or buy
puts, both of which are short market positions, we will have to hedge by purchasing the
underlying contract. Now we ought to use the asked price since that is the price at
which we can buy the underlying,

In practice, the bid and offer are constantly changing, and many traders will simply
use the last trade price as the basis for theoretical evaluation. But the last trade price
May not always reflect the present market. Even the settlement price quoted in a
newspaper may not accurately reflect the market at the close of business. The last trade
price may show 751% for a contract, but the market at the close may have been 75%
bid, 7514 offered. A trader who hoped to buy at 7514 would have very little chance of
being filled because of the difficulty of buying at the bid price. Even a purchase at some
Middle price, say 7594, may be unlikely if the market is very unbalanced with many
more contracts being bid for at 75'/4 than offered at 7514. For all of these reasons, an
experienced trader will rarely enter an option market without knowing the exact bid
and offer in the underlying market.

INTEREST RATES

Since an option trade may result in either a cash credit or debit to a trader’s account,
the interest considerations resulting from this cash flow must also play a role in option
evaluation. This is a function of interest rates over the life of the option.

The interest rate component plays two roles in the theoretical evaluation of options.
First, it May affect the forward price of the underlying contract. If the underlying


--- 第 61 页 ---

48 Chapter 3

contract is subject to stock-type settlement, as we raise interest rates we raise the
forward price, increasing the value of calls and decreasing the value of puts. Secondly,
the interest rate may affect the cost of carrying the option. If the option is subject to
stock-type settlement, as we raise interest rates we decrease the value of the option. In
spite of the fact that the interest rate plays two roles, in most cases the same rate is
applicable and we need only input one interest rate into the model. If, however,
different rates are applicable, such as would be the case with foreign currency options
(the foreign currency interest rate plays one role, the domestic currency interest rate
plays a different role) the model will require the input of two interest rates. This is the
case with the Garman-Kohlhagen version of the Black-Scholes Model.

The fact that interest rates play a dual role also means that the relative importance
of interest rates will vary, depending on the type of underlying instrument and the
settlement procedure. For example, interest rates have a much greater impact on the
value of stock options than on futures options. As we raise interest rates, we increase
the forward price of stock, but leave the forward price of a futures contract unchanged.
At the same time, assuming stock-type settlement, as we raise interest rates we decrease
the value of options. The option price, however, is usually very small in relation to the
price of the underlying contract.

What interest rate should a trader use when evaluating options? Most traders
cannot borrow and lend at the same rate, so the correct interest rate will, in theory,
depend on whether the trade will create a debit or a credit. In the former case the trader
will be interested in the borrowing rate, while in the latter case he will be interested in
the lending rate. In practice, however, the most common solution is to use the risk-free
interest rate, i.e., the most secure rate. In the United States, the government is usually
considered the most secure borrower of funds, so that the yield on a government
security with a term equivalent to the life of the option is the general benchmark. Fora
60-day option, use the yield on a 60-day treasury bill; for a 180-day option, use the yield
on a 180-day treasury bill.

DIVIDENDS

We did not list dividends as an input in Figure 3-4 since they are only a factor in the
theoretical evaluation of stock options, and then only if the stock is expected to pay a
dividend over the life of the option.

In order to accurately evaluate a stock option, a trader must know both the amount
of the dividend which the stock will pay and the ex-dividend date, the date on which a
trader must own the stock in order to receive the dividend. The emphasis here is on
ownership of the stock. A deeply in-the-money option may have many of the same
characteristics as stock, but only ownership of the stock carries with it the right to collect
the dividend.

In the absence of other information, most traders tend to assume that a company
will continue the same dividend policy it has had in the past. If the company has been
paying a 75¢ dividend each quarter, it will probably continue to do so. However, this
is not always a certainty. Companies sometimes increase or decrease dividends, and


--- 第 62 页 ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Modeis 49

occasionally omit them completely. If there is the possibility of a change in a company’s
dividend policy, a trader has to consider its impact on option values. Additionally, if the
ex-dividend date is expected just prior to expiration, there is the danger that a delay of
several days will cause the ex-dividend date to fall after expiration. For purposes of
option evaluation, this is the same as eliminating the dividend completely. In such a
situation a trader ought to make a special effort to ascertain the exact ex-dividend date.

VOLATILITY

Of all the inputs required for option evaluation, volatility is the most difficult for traders
to understand. At the same time, volatility often plays the most important role in actual
trading situations. Changes in our assumptions about volatility can have a dramatic
effect on an option’s value, and the manner in which the marketplace assesses volatility
can have an equally dramatic effect on an option’s price. For these reasons, we will
devote the next chapter to a detailed discussion of volatility.


--- 第 63 页 ---

% 4%

Volatility

What is volatility and why is it so important to an option trader? The option trader, like
a trader in the underlying instrument, is interested in the direction of the market. But
unlike the trader in the underlying, an option trader is also extremely sensitive to the
speed of the market. If the market for an underlying contract fails to move at a sufficient
speed, options on that contract will have less value because of the reduced likelihood
of the market going through an option’s exercise price. In a sense, volatility is a measure
of the speed of the market. Markets which move slowly are low-volatility markets;
markets which move quickly are high-volatility markets.

One might guess intuitively that some markets are more volatile than others.
Between 1980 and 1982, the price of gold moved from $300 per ounce to $800 per
ounce, more than doubling its price. Yet few traders would predict that the S&P 500
Index might more than double in a similar period. A commodity trader knows that
precious metals are generally more volatile than interest rate instruments. In the same
way, a stock trader knows that high-technology stocks tend to be more volatile than
utility stocks.

If we knew whether a market was likely to be relatively volatile, or relatively quiet,
and could convey this information to a theoretical pricing model, any evaluation of
options on that market would be more accurate than if we simply ignored volatility.
Since option models are based on mathematical formulae, we will need some method
of quantifying this volatility component so that we can feed it into the model in
numerical form.

RANDOM WALKS AND NORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS

Consider for a moment the pinball maze pictured in Figure 4-1. When a ball is dropped
into the maze at the top it moves downward, pulled by gravity, through a series of nails.
When the ball encounters each nail there is a 50% chance the bail will move to the right,
and a 50% chance it will move left. The ball then falls down to a new level where it
encounters another nail. Finally, at the bottom of the maze the ball falls into one of the
troughs.

The path the ball follows as it moves downward through the maze of nails is known
as a random walk. Once the ball enters the maze nothing can be done to artificially alter
its course, nor can one predict ahead of time the path the ball will take through the
maze,

51


--- 第 64 页 ---

52 Chapter 4

Figure 4-1: Random Walk

If enough balls are dropped into the maze, we might begin to get a distribution of
balls similar to that in Figure 4-2. Most of the balls tend to congregate near the center
of the maze, with a decreasing number of balls ending up in troughs further away from
the center. The distribution which results from dropping many balls into our maze is
referred to as a normal, or bell-shaped, distribution.

Tf we were to drop an infinite number of balls into the maze we might approximate
the distribution with a normal, or bell-shaped, curve such as the one overlaid on the
distribution in Figure 4-2. Such a curve is symmetrical (if we flipped it from right to left
it would look the same), it has its peak in the center, and its tails always flare down and
away from the center.

Normal distribution curves are used to describe the likely outcomes of random
events. For example, the curve in Figure 4-2 might also represent the results of flipping
acoin 15 times. Each outcome, or trough, would represent the number of heads which
occurred after each 15 flips. An outcome in trough zero would represent zero heads and
15 tails; an outcome in trough 15 would represent 15 heads and zero tails. Of course,
we would be surprised to flip a coin 15 times and get all heads or all tails. Assuming the


--- 第 65 页 ---

Volatility 53

Figure 4-2: Normal Distribution

coin is perfectly balanced; some outcome in between, perhaps 8 heads and 7 tails, or 9
heads and 6 tails, seems more likely.

Suppose we change our maze slightly by closing off a row of nails so that each time
a ball encounters a nail and goes either left or right, it must drop down two levels before
it encounters another nail. If we drop enough balls into the maze we may end up with
a distribution represented by the curve in Figure 4-3. Since the sideways movement of
the balls is restricted, the curve will have a higher peak and narrower tails than the curve
in Figure 4-2. In spite of its altered shape, this curve still represents a normal distribution,
although one with slightly different characteristics.

Finally, we might block off some of the spaces between nails so that each time a
ball drops down a level it must move two nails left or right before it can drop down to
4 new level. Again, if we drop enough balls into the maze we may get a distribution
Which resembles the curve in Figure 4-4. This curve, while still a normal distribution
Curve, will have a much lower peak and its tails will spread out much more quickly than
the curves in either Figure 4-2 or 4-3.


--- 第 66 页 ---

54 Chapter 4

Figure 4-3: Low Volatility Distribution

Suppose we now think of the ball’s sideways movement as the up and down price
movement of an underlying contract, and the ball’s downward movement as the
passage of time. If we assume that each day the underlying contract can move up or
down $1, the price distribution after 15 days might be represented by the curve in Figure
4-2. If we assume the price can move up or down $1 every two days, the price
distribution after 15 days might be represented by the curve in Figure 4-3. And if we
assume that each day the price can move up or down $2, the price distribution might
be represented by the curve in Figure 4-4.

With the underlying contract presently at $100 and 15 days to expiration, how
might we evaluate a $105 call? One way is to assume that prices follow a random walk
through time and that one of the curves in Figures 4-2, 4-3, or 4-4 represents the likely
distribution after 15 days. The comparative value of the $105 call under these three
scenarios is shown in Figure 4-5. If we assume a distribution similar to Figure 4-3, we
can see that the underlying contract has very little chance of reaching $105. Conse-
quently, the value of the $105 call will be low. If we assume a distribution similar to
Figure 4-2, there is an increased probability of the underlying reaching $105, and this
will increase the value of the $105 call. Finally, if we assume a distribution similar to


--- 第 67 页 ---

Volatility 55

Figure 4-4: High Volatility Distribution

ain ae
Le.
eg

Figure 4-4, there is a very real likelihood that the $105 call could finish in-the-money.
Asa result, the value of the option will increase dramatically.

If we assume only that the price movement of an underlying contract follows a
random walk, and nothing about the likely direction of movement, the curves in Figures
4-2, 4-3, and 4-4 might represent possible price distributions in a moderate-volatility,
low-volatility, and high-volatility market, respectively. In a low-volatility market, price
Movement is severely restricted, and consequently options will command relatively low
Premiums. In a high-volatility market the chances for extreme price movement is greatly
increased, and options will command high premiums.

Since the different price distributions in Figure 4-5 are symmetrical, it may seem
that increased volatility should have no effect on an option’s value. After all, increased
volatility may increase the likelihood of large upward movement, but this should be
offset by the equally greater likelinood of large downward movement. Here, however,
there is an important distinction between an option position and an underlying position.
Unlike an underlying contract, an option’s potential loss is limited. No matter how far
the market drops, a call option can only go to zero. In our example, whether the market
finishes at $80 or $104 at expiration, the $105 call will be worthless. However, if we
buy the underlying contract at $100, there is a tremendous difference between the


--- 第 68 页 ---

56 Chapter 4

Figure 4-5: Price Distribution at Expiration

present price
of underlying

low volatility

distribution a

moderate volatility
distribution ~.

exercise
price

high volatility
distribution ‘
NS
a .
ae NTs.
ee ee
re ——$

market finishing at $80 or $104. With an underlying contract all outcomes are
important; with an option, only those outcomes which result in the option finishing
in-the-money are important. In Figure 45, we are only concerned with price outcomes
to the right of the exercise price. Everything else is zero.

This leads to an important distinction between evaluation of an underlying contract
and evaluation of an option. If we assume that prices are distributed along a normal
distribution curve, the value of an underlying contract depends on where the peak of the
curve is located, while the value of an option depends on how fast the curve spreads out.

MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION

Suppose we want to use the concept of price movement based on normal distribution
curves in a theoretical pricing model. To do this we need a method of describing the
characteristics of the curve to the model. Since the model is based on mathematics, we
need to describe the curve in numerical! terms so that we can feed the numbers into the
model.

Fortunately, a normal distribution curve can be fully described with two numbers,
the mean and the standard deviation. If we know that a distribution is normal, and we
also know these two numbers, then we know all the characteristics of the distribution.

Graphically, we can interpret the mean as the location of the peak of the curve, and
the standard deviation as a measure of how fast the curve spreads out. Curves which


--- 第 69 页 ---

Volatility 57

spread out very quickly, such as Figure 4-4, have a high standard deviation; curves
which spread out very slowly, such as Figure 4-3, have a low standard deviation.

While the mean is nothing more than the average outcome, and therefore a familiar
concept for many traders, the standard deviation may not be quite so familiar. Indeed,
one need not know how either of these numbers are calculated in order to successfully
trade options. (For those who are interested, a more detailed discussion appears in
Appendix B.) What is important to an option trader is the interpretation of these
numbers, in particular what a mean and standard deviation suggest in terms of likely
price movement.

Let’s go back to Figure 4-2 and consider the troughs numbered 0 to 15 at the
bottom. We suggested that these numbers might represent the number of heads
resulting from 15 flips of a coin. Alternatively, they might also represent the number of
times a ball went right at each nail as it dropped down through the maze. The first
trough is assigned zero since any ball which ends there must have gone left at every
nail, The last trough is assigned 15 since any ball which ends there must have gone right
at every nail.

Suppose we are told that the mean and standard deviation in Figure 4-2 are 7.50
and 3.00, respectively. What does this tell us about the distribution? (The actual mean
and standard deviation of 7.51 and 2.99 are calculated in Appendix B. Here, for
simplicity, we will round to 7.50 and 3.00.} The mean tells us the average outcome. If
we add up all the outcomes and divide by the number of occurrences, the result will De
7.50. In terms of the troughs, the average result will fall half-wey between troughs 7
and 8. (Of course this is not an actual possibility. However, we noted in Chapter 3 that
the average outcome does not have to be an actual possibility for any one outcome.}

The standard deviation not only describes how fast the distribution spreads out; it
also tells us something about the likelihood of a ball ending up in a specific trough or
group of troughs. In particular, the standard deviation tells us the probability of a ball
ending up in a trough which is a specified distance from the mean. For example, we
May want to know the likelihood of a ball falling down through the maze and ending
up in a trough lower than 5 or higher than 10. We can answer the question by asking
how many standard deviations the ball must move away from the mean, and then
determine the probability associated with that number of standard deviations.

The exact probability associated with any specific number of standard deviations
can be found in mathematical tables in most books on statistics. Alternatively, such
probabilities can be closely approximated using an appropriate formula (see Appendix
B). For option traders the following approximations will be useful:

+1 standard deviation takes in approximately 68.3% (about 24) of all occurrences

+2 standard deviations takes in approximately 95.4% (about !9%o) of all occur-
rences

+3 standard deviations takes in approximately 99.7% (about 369470) of all occur-
rences


--- 第 70 页 ---

58 Chapter 4

Note that each number of standard deviations is preceded by a plus or minus sign.
Because normal distributions are symmetrical, the likelihood of up movement and down
movement is identical.

Now let’s try to answer our question about the likelihood of getting a ball in a
trough lower than 5 or higher than 10. We can designate the divider between troughs
7 and 8 as the mean of 7!/. If the standard deviation is 3, what troughs are within one
standard deviation of the mean? One standard deviation from the mean is 714 +3 =
4 to 104%. Again interpreting 14 as the divider between troughs, we can see that
troughs 5 through 10 fall within one standard deviation of the mean. We know that one
standard deviation takes in about 2/3 of all occurrences, so we can conclude that out
of every three balls we drop into the maze, two should end up in troughs 5 through 10.
What is left over, one out of every three balls, will end up in one of the remaining
troughs, 0-4 and 11-15. Hence, the answer to our original question about the likelihood
of getting a ball in a trough lower than 5 or higher than 10 is about 1 chance in 3, or
about 33%. (The exact answer is 100% — 68.3%, or 31.7%.} This is shown in Figure 4-6.

Let’s try another calculation, but this time we can think of the problem as a wager.
Suppose someone offers us 30 to 1 odds that we can’t drop a ball into the maze and get
it specifically in troughs 14 or 15. Is this bet worth making? One characteristic of
standard deviations is that they are additive. In our example, if one standard deviation
is 3, then two standard deviations are 6, Two standard deviations from the mean is
therefore 71 + 6 = 14% to 13%. We can see in Figure 4-6 that troughs 14 and 15 lie
outside two standard deviations. Since the probability of getting a result within two
standard deviations is approximately 19 out of 20, the probability of getting a result
beyond two standard deviations is 1 chance in 20. Therefore 30 to 1 odds may seem
very favorable. Recall, however, that beyond two standard deviations also includes
troughs 0 and 1. Since norma! distributions are symmetrical, the chances of getting a
Dall specifically in troughs 14 or 15 must be half of 1 chance in 20, or about 1 chance
in 40. At 30 to 1 odds the bet must be a bad one since the odds do not sufficiently
compensate us for the risk involved.

In Chapter 3 we said that one logical approach to option evaluation is to assign a
probability to an infinite number of possible price outcomes for an underlying contract.
Then, if we multiply each possible price outcome by its associated probability we can
use the results to calculate an option’s theoretical value. The problem is in dealing with
an infinite number of price outcomes and probabilities, since an infinite number of
anything is not easy to work with. Fortunately, the characteristics of normal distribu-
tions have been so closely studied that formulas have been developed which facilitate
the computation of both the probabilities associated with every point along a normal
distribution curve, as well as the area under various portions of the curve. If we assume
that prices of an underlying instrument are normally distributed, these formulas repre-
sent a unique set of tools with which we can solve for an option’s theoretical value. This
is one of the reasons Black and Scholes adopted the normal distribution assumption as
part of their model.


--- 第 71 页 ---

Volatility 59

ee
Figure 4-6
+1 standard deviation = 68.3% (2/3)

Mean = 7.50

+2 standard deviations = 95.4% (19/20)
Standard Deviation = 3.00 -

+3 standard deviations = 99.7% (369/370)

2 -1 +1 +2
standard standard mean standard standard
deviations deviation 7.50 deviation deviations

1.50 4.50 10.50 13.50



--- 第 72 页 ---

60 Chapter 4

UNDERLYING PRICE AS THE MEAN OF A DISTRIBUTION

Now that we have decided to describe prices in terms of a normal distribution, how do
we feed this distribution into a theoretical pricing model? Since all normal distributions
can be described by a mean and the standard deviation, in some way we must feed these
two numbers into our pricing model.

When we enter the present price of an underlying instrument we are actually
entering the mean of a normal distribution curve. An important assumption in the
Black-Scholes Model is that, in the long run, a trade in the underlying instrument will
just break even. It will neither make money nor lose money. Given this assumption, the
mean of the normal distribution curve assumed in the model must be the price at which
a trade in the underlying instrument, either a purchase ora sale, would just break even.
What is that price? The answer depends on the type of underlying instrument.

Suppose a trader purchases a futures contract at 100 and holds the position for three
months. Where does the price of the futures contract have to be at the end of three
months for the trader to break even? Since futures contracts entail no carrying costs,
nor do they pay dividends, the break even price three months from now is exactly the
original trade price of 100.

Now suppose that a trader purchases a $100 stock and holds it for three months.
Where does the stock price have to be at the end of the holding period for the trader to
break even? Since the purchase of stock requires immediate payment, the break even
price will have to include the cost of carrying a $100 debit for three months. If interest
rates are 8% annually the carrying cost on $100 for three months is 42 x 8% x $100
= $2. Therefore, the stock price must be $102 at the end of three months for the trade
to break even. If the stock will pay a dividend of $1 during the holding period, then the
stock price need only be $101 for the trade to break even.

Note that this is exactly how we calculated the forward price of a contract in
Chapter 3. And indeed this is exactly the type of calculation built into the various forms
of the Black-Scholes Model. When we enter an underlying price into the Black-Scholes
model, based on the type of underlying instrument, interest rates, and dividends, the
model calculates the forward price of the underlying instrument at expiration and makes
this price the mean of a normal distribution curve.

VOLATILITY AS A STANDARD DEVIATION

In addition to the mean, we also need a standard deviation to fully describe a normal
distribution curve. This is entered in the form ofa volatility. With some slight modifica-
tions, which we will discuss shortly, we can define the volatility number associated with
an underlying instrument as a one standard deviation price change, in percent, at the
end of a one-year period.

For example, suppose that an underlying futures contract is currently trading at 100
and has a volatility of 20%. Since this represents a one standard deviation price change,
one year from now we expect the same futures contract to be trading between 80 and
120 (100 + 20%) approximately 68% of the time, between 60 and 140 (100 + (2 x 20%))


--- 第 73 页 ---

Volatility 61

approximately 95% of the time, and between 40 and 160 (100 + (3 x 20%}) approxi-
mately 99.7% of the time.

If the underlying contract is a stock currently trading at $100, then the 20%
volatility will have to be based on the forward price of the stock at the end of one year.
If interest rates are 8% and the stock pays no dividends, the one-year forward price will
be $108. Now a one standard deviation price change is 20% x $108 = $21.60. So one
year from now we would expect the same stock to be trading between $86.40 and
$129.60 ($108 + $21.60] approximately 68% of the time, between $64.80 and
$151.30 ($108 + (2 x $21.60)) approximately 95% of the time, and between $43.20
and $172.90 ($108 + (3 x $21.60)} approximately 99.7% of the time.

Suppose we come back at the end of one year and find our futures contract, which
we thought had a volatility of 20%, trading at 35. Does this mean our volatility of 20%
was wrong? A price change of more than three standard deviations may be unlikely, but
one shouldn’t confuse unlikely and impossible. Flipping a perfectly balanced coin 15
times may result in 15 heads, even though the odds against it are more than 32,000 to
1. If 20% was the right volatility, the odds of the futures price going from 100 to 35 one
year later is more than 1,500 to 1. But one chance in 1,500 is not impossible, and
perhaps this was the one time in 1,500 when the price would indeed end up at 35, Of
course, it is also possible that we had the wrong volatility. But we wouldn’t know this
without looking at price changes of the futures contract over many years so that we have
a representative price distribution.

LOGNORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS

Is it reasonable to assume that the prices of an underlying instrument are normally
distributed? Beyond the question of the exact distribution of prices in the real world,
the normal distribution assumption has one serious flaw. A normal distribution curve is
symmetrical. Under a normal distribution assumption, for every possible upward move
in the price of an underlying instrument there must be the possibility of a downward
move of equal magnitude. If we allow for the possibility of a $50 instrument rising $75
to $125, we must also allow for the possibility of the instrument dropping $75 toa price
of -$25. Since it is impossible for traditional stocks and commodities to take on negative
Prices, the normal distribution assumption is clearly flawed. What can we do about this?

Up to now we have defined volatility in terms of the percent changes in the price
of an underlying instrument. In this sense an interest rate and volatility are similar in
that they both represent a rate of return. The primary difference between interest and
Volatility is that interest generally accrues at a positive rate, while volatility represents a
combination of positive and negative rates of return. If one invests money at a fixed
interest rate, the value of the principal will always grow. But if one invests in an
Underlying instrument with a volatility other than zero, the instrument may go either
up or down in price. Volatility, which is a standard deviation, says nothing about the
direction of movement.

Since volatility represents a rate of return, an important consideration is the manner
in which the rate of return is calculated. For example, suppose we were to invest $1,000


--- 第 74 页 ---

62 Chapter 4

for one year at an annual interest rate of 12%. How much would we have at the end of
one year? The answer depends on how the 12% interest on our investment is paid out,

Value after

Rate of Payment One Year Total Yield
12% once a year $1,120.00 12%

6% twice a year $1,123.60 12.36%
3% every three months $1,125.51 12.55%
1% every month $1,126.83 12.68%
12%/52 every week $1,127.34 12.73%
12%/365 every day $1,127.47 12.75%
12% compounded continuously $1,127.50 12.75%

AS interest is paid more often, even though it is paid at the same rate of 12% per
year, the total yield on the investment increases. The yield is greatest when interest is
paid continuously. In this case it is just as if interest were paid at every possible moment
in time.

Although less common, we can do the same type of calculation using a negative
interest rate. For example, suppose we were to lose 12 percent annually on our $1,000
investment (interest rate = -12%). How much would we have at the end of a year? The
answer depends on the frequency at which our losses accrue.

Value after

Rate of Loss , One Year Total Yield
—12% once a year $880.00 -12%
-6% twice a year $883.60 -11.64%
-3% every three months $885.29 —11.47%
-1% every month $886.38 -11.36%
-12%/52 every week $886.80 -11.32%
-12%/365 every day $886.90 -11.31%
12% compounded continuously $886.92 11.31%

Tn the case of a negative interest rate, as lasses are compounded more frequently,
even though at the same rate of -12% per year, the loss becomes smaller, and so does
the negative yield.

In the same way that interest can be compounded at different intervals, volatility
can also be compounded at different intervals. For purposes of theoretical pricing of
options, volatility is assumed to compound continuously, just as if the price changes in
the underlying instrument, either up or down, were taking place continuously but at an
annual rate corresponding to the volatility number associated with the underlying
instrument.

What would happen if at every moment in time the price of an underlying could
go up or down a given percent, and that these up and down movements were normally
distributed? When price changes are assumed to be normally distributed, the continu-


--- 第 75 页 ---

Volatility 63

ous compounding of these price changes will cause the prices at maturity to be
lognormally distributed. Such a distribution is skewed toward the upside because
upside prices resulting from a positive rate of return will be greater, in absolute terms,
than downside prices resulting from a negative rate of return (Figure 4-7), In our interest
rate example, a continuously compounded rate of return of +12% yields a profit of
$127.50 after one year, while a continuously compounded rate of return of -12% yields
a loss of only $113.08. If the 12% were a volatility, then a one standard deviation
upward price change at the end of one year would be +$127.50, while a one standard
deviation downward price change would be -$113.08. Even though the rate of return
was a constant 12%, the continuous compounding of the 12% yielded different upward
and downward moves.

The Black-Scholes Model is a continuous time model. It assumes that the volatility
of an underlying instrument is constant over the life of the option, but that this volatility
is continuously compounded. These two assumptions mean that the possible prices of
the underlying instrument at expiration of the option are lognormally distributed. It also
explains why options with higher exercise prices carry more value than options with
lower exercise prices, where both exercise prices appear to be an identical amount away
from the price of the underlying instrument. For example, suppose a certain underlying
contract is trading at exactly 100. If there are no interest considerations and we assume

Figure 4-7: Lognormal Distribution

lognormal
distribution

normal
distribution



--- 第 76 页 ---

64 Chapter 4

a normal distribution of possible prices, then the 110 call and the 90 put, both being
10% outof-the-money, ought to have identical theoretical values. But under the
lognormal assumption in the Black-Scholes Model, the 110 call will always have a
greater value than the 90 put. In absolute terms, the lognormal distribution assumption
allows for greater upside price movement than downside price movement. Conse-
quently, the 110 call will have a greater possibility of price appreciation than the 90
put.

Finally, the lognormal assumption built into the Black-Scholes Model overcomes
the logical problem we initially posed. If we were to allow for the possibility of unlimited
upside price movement of an underlying instrument, a normal distribution assumption
would force us to allow for unlimited downside movement. This would require us to
accept the possibility of negative prices for the underlying instrument, clearly not a
possibility for most optionable instruments. A lognormal distribution, however, does
allow for open ended upside prices (the logarithm of +00 is +00], while bounding
downside prices by zero (the logarithm of —<« is zero). This is a more realistic repre-
sentation of how prices are actually distributed in the real world.

A more complete discussion of logarithmic price changes and probability calcula-
tions can be found in Appendix B.

We can now summarize the most important assumptions governing price move-
ment in the Black-Scholes Model:

1. Changes in the price of an underlying instrument are random and cannot be
artificially manipulated, nor is it possible to predict beforehand the direction
in which prices will move.

2. The percent changes in the price of an underlying instrument are normally
distributed.

3. Because the percent changes in the price of the underlying instrument are
assumed to be continuously compounded, the prices of the underlying instru-
ment at expiration will be lognormally distributed.

4, The mean of the lognormal distribution will be located at the forward price of
the underlying contract.

The first of these assumptions may meet with resistance from some traders.
Technical analysts believe that by looking at past price activity it is possible to predict
the future direction of prices. One can chart support and resistance points, double tops
and bottoms, head and shoulders, and many similar formations which are believed to
predict future price trends, We leave debate on this question to others. The important
point here is that the Black-Scholes Model makes the assumption that price changes are
random and that their direction cannot be predicted. This does not mean that there is
no predictive requirement in using the Black-Scholes Model. However, price prediction

1. Ofcourse, this is only theory. There is no law that says the price of the 90 put in the marketplace cannot
be greater than the price of the 110 call.


--- 第 77 页 ---

Volatility 65

will focus on the magnitude of the price changes, rather than on the direction of
changes.

As we shall see later, there is also good reason to question the third assumption,
that prices are lognormally distributed at expiration. This may be a reasonable assump-
tion for some markets, but a very poor assumption for other markets. Again, the
important point here is for the trader who uses a theoretical pricing model to understand
the assumptions on which the theoretical values are based. He can then make his own
decision, based on his knowledge of a particular market, as to whether these assump-
tions, and hence the theoretical values generated by the model, are likely to be accurate.

DAILY AND WEEKLY STANDARD DEVIATIONS

As an annual standard deviation, we know what the volatility tells us about the likely
price movement of a contract over a one-year period. However, this is a period of time
longer than the life of most listed options. We might want to know what a volatility tells
us about price changes over a shorter period of time, for example over a month, or a
week, or a day.

An important characteristic of volatility is that it is proportional to the square root
of time. As a result of this, we can approximate a volatility over some period of time
shorter than a year by dividing the annual volatility by the square root of the number of
trading periods in a year.

Suppose we are interested in a daily volatility. While it would take a logarithmic
calculation to give us an exact daily volatility, if we ignore the relatively minor effect of
continuous compounding over such a short period of time, it is possible to make an
estimate of daily volatility. First we must determine the number of daily trading periods
in a year. That is, if we look at prices at the end of every day, how many times a year
can prices change? If we restrict ourselves to exchange traded options, even though
there are 365 days in a year, prices cannot really change on weekends or holidays, This
leaves us with about 256 trading days during the year.? Since the square root of 256 is
16, to approximate a daily volatility we can divide the annual volatility by 16.

Going back to our futures contract trading at 100 with a volatility of 20%, what is
a one standard deviation price change over a day’s time? 20%/16 = 114%, so a one
Standard deviation daily price change is 114% x 100 = 1.25. We expect to see a price
change of 1.25 or less approximately two trading days out of every three, and a price
change of 2.50 or less approximately 19 trading days out of every 20. Only one day in
20 would we expect to see a price change of more than 2.50.

We can do the same type of calculation for a weekly standard deviation. Now we
Must ask how many times per year prices can change if we look at prices once a week.
Unlike trading days, we don’t have “holiday” weeks, so we must make our calculations
using all 52 trading weeks in a year. Dividing our annual volatility of 20% by the square
root of 52, or approximately 7.2, we get 20%/7.2 = 234. For our futures contract

_—_———

2. Depending on holidays, the number of trading days Is usually somewhere between 250 and 255. We
use 256 as a reasonable approximation since its square root is a whole number and therefore easier to
work with.


--- 第 78 页 ---

66 Chapter 4

trading at 100, we would expect to see a price change of 2.75 or less two weeks out of
every three, a price change of 5.50 or less 19 weeks out of every 20, and only one week
in twenty would we expect to see a price change of more than 5.50.

Since we assume that the price of a stock will appreciate by the carrying cost, it
may seem that we cannot use the same method (divide by 16 for daily volatility; divide
by 7.2 for weekly volatility] to approximate expected movement in an underlying stock.
However, over a short period of time, the carrying cost component, like the effect of
continuous compounding of volatility, will be relatively small. Therefore, we can use
the same method as a reasonable estimate of daily and weekly volatility. For example,
suppose a stock is trading at $45 per share and has an annual volatility of 28%. What is
an approximate one standard deviation price change over a day’s time and over a week’s
time?

For a daily volatility we calculate:

28%/16 x $45 = 1.75% x $45 = $.79
For a weekly volatility we calculate:
28%/7.2 x $45 = 3.89% x $45 = $1.75

We expect to see a price change of approximately 34 point or less two days out of
every three, 114 points or less 19 days out of every 20, and only one day in 20 would
we expect to see a price change of more than 114 points. On a weekly basis, we would
expect to see a price change of 154 points or less two weeks out of every three, a price
change of 3 points or less 19 weeks out of every 20, and only one week in 20 would
we expect to see a price change of more than 314 points.

We have used the phrase “price change” in conjunction with our volatility
estimates. Exactly what do we mean by this? Do we mean the high/low during some
period? Do we mean open to close price changes? Or is there another interpretation?
While various methods have been suggested to estimate volatility,> the traditional
method has been to calculate volatility based on settlement-to-settlement price changes.
Using this approach, when we say a one standard deviation daily price change is %
point, we mean a 34 point price change from one day’s settlement price to the next
day’s settlement price. The high/low or open/close price change may have been either
more or less than 4 point, but it is the settlement-to-settlement price change on which
we focus.

3. See:
Parkinson, Michael, “The Extreme Value Method of Estimating the Variance of the Rate of Return,”
Journal of Business, 1980, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 61-64.
Garman, Mark B. and Klass, Michael J., “On the Estimation of Security Price Volatilities from Historical
Data,” Journal of Business, 1980, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 67-78.
Beckers, Stan, “Variance of Security Price Returns Based on High, Low, and Closing Prices,” Journal of
Business, 1983, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 97~112.


--- 第 79 页 ---

Volatility 67

VOLATILITY AND OBSERVED PRICE CHANGES

Why is it important for a trader to be able to estimate daily or weekly price changes from
an annual volatility? Volatility is the one input into a theoretical pricing model which
cannot be directly observed. Yet many option strategies, if they are to be successful,
require an accurate assessment of volatility. Therefore, an option trader needs some
method of determining whether his expectations about volatility are indeed being
realized in the marketplace. Unlike directional strategies, whose success or failure can
pe immediately observed from posted prices, there is no posting of volatilities. A trader
must determine for himself whether he is using a reasonable volatility input into the
theoretical pricing model.

For example, suppose a certain underlying contract is trading at 40 and a trader is
using a 30% volatility for theoretical evaluation. A one standard deviation daily price
change is approximately 30%/16 x 40 = .75. Over five days of trading a trader notes
the following five settlement-to-settlement price changes: ,

+.43, —06, -.61, +.50, -.28

Are these five price changes consistent with a 30% volatility?

The trader expects to see a price change of more than .75 (one standard deviation}
about one day in three, or between one and two times over a five-day period. Yet during
this five-day period he did not see a price change of this magnitude even once. What
conclusions can be drawn from this?4 One thing is certain: these five price changes are
not consistent with 30% volatility. The trader might explain the discrepancy in one of
two ways. On the one hand, perhaps this was expected to be an abnormally quiet week
(perhaps it was a holiday week); and next week when trading returns to normal the
market will go right back to making moves which are more consistent with a 30%
Volatility. If the trader comes to this conclusion, perhaps he ought to continue to use a
30% volatility for his calculations. On the other hand, perhaps there is no apparent
reason for the market being less volatile than predicted by a 30% volatility. He may
simply be using the wrong volatility. If the trader comes to this conclusion, perhaps he
ought to consider using a new volatility input which is more consistent with the
observed price changes. If he continues to use a 30% volatility in the face of price
changes which are significantly less than predicted by that number, he will be assigning
the wrong probabilities to the possible price outcomes for the underlying contract.
Consequently, he will generate incorrect theoretical values, defeating the purpose of
using a theoretical pricing model in the first place.

Exactly what volatility is associated with the five price changes in the foregoing
example? Without some rather involved calculations it is difficult to say. (The answer
is actually 18.8%.}] However, ifa trader has some idea beforehand of what price changes
he expects, he can easily see that the changes over the five-day period are not consistent
with a 30% volatility.

4. — Five days is admittedly a very small sample from which to draw a meaningful conclusion about
volatility. The method and reasoning, however, are still valld.


--- 第 80 页 ---

68 Chapter 4

Let’s look at another example. Now the underlying contract is trading at 33214
and a trader notes the following five daily price changes:

-5, +24, +1, -7%, -44

Are these price changes consistent with an 18% volatility? At 18% a one standard
deviation price change is approximately 18%/16 x 33214 = 354. Over five days we
expect to see a price change of more than 334 between one and two times. Yet here we
have a price change of more than 3% three days out of five. And once the price change
was 7°94 (more than two standard deviations} which we expect to see only one day in
twenty. Again, unless the trader believes that the five price changes occurred during an
extraordinary week, then perhaps he ought to consider changing his volatility figure so
that it is more consistent with the observed price changes.

A NOTE ON INTEREST RATE PRODUCTS

Suppose Eurodollars are at 93.00 and we assume a volatility of 16 percent. We can apply
the method previously described to calculate an approximate one standard deviation
daily price change: 16%/16 x 93.00 = .93. As any trader familiar with the Eurodollar
market will attest, a daily price change of .93 is wildly unlikely. How can we account
for this seemingly illogical answer? One might conclude that we simply have the wrong
volatility, and some lower number is more accurate. In fact, the 16% volatility is not at
all unusual for Eurodollars, so the explanation must lie elsewhere.

Eurodollars, like many other interest rate contracts (U.S. Treasury Bills, Short
Sterling, Euromarks, Euroyen) are indexed from 100. This means that the interest rate
associated with a Eurodollar contract is 100 less the value of the contract. It also means
that, barring the unlikely advent of negative interest rates, the contract cannot take on
a value greater than 100. In this respect, 100 acts as a limiting value for Eurodollars in
the same way that zero acts as a limiting value for traditional underlying contracts such
as stocks and commodities. We can integrate this characteristic into our calculations by
assuming that the value of a Eurodollar contract is actually 100 less its listed price. If
the listed price is 93.00, for theoretical evaluation purposes we must use a value of 100
— 93.00, or 7.00, in our pricing model. If we define the value of the contract as 7.00, a
one standard deviation price change is 16%/16 x 7.00 = .07. This is certainly a more
realistic result than .93.

To be consistent, if we index Eurodollar prices from 100 we must also index
exercise prices from 100. Therefore, a 93.50 exercise price in our pricing model is really
a 6.50 (100 ~ 93.50) exercise price. This also requires us to reverse the type of option,
changing calls to puts and puts to calls. To see why, consider a 93.50 call. For this call
to go into-the-money, the underlying contract must rise above 93.50. But this requires
that interest rates fall below 6.50 percent. Therefore, a 93.50 call in listed terms is the
same as a 6.50 put in interest rate terms. A model which is correctly set up to evaluate
options on Eurodollar or other types of indexed interest rate contracts automatically
makes this transformation. The price of the underlying contract and the exercise price


--- 第 81 页 ---

Volatility 69

are subtracted from 100, while listed calls are treated as puts and listed puts are treated
as calls.

Note that this type of transformation is not required for most bonds and notes.
Depending on the coupon rate, the prices of these products may range freely without
upper limit, often exceeding 100, They are therefore most often evaluated using a
traditional pricing model, although interest rate products present other problems that
may require specialized pricing models.

It is possible to take an instrument such as a bond and calculate the current yield
based on its price in the marketplace. If we were to take a series of prices and from these
calculate a series of yields, we could also calculate the yield volatility, i.e., the volatility
pased on the change in yield. We might then use this number to evaluate the theoretical
value of an option on the bond, although to be consistent we would also have to specify
the exercise price in terms of yield. Because it is possibie to calculate the volatility of an
interest rate product using these two different methods, interest rate traders sometimes
refer to yield volatility (the volatility calculated from the current yield on the instrument)
versus price volatility (the volatility calculated from the price of the instrument in the
marketplace).

TYPES OF VOLATILITIES

When traders discuss volatility, even experienced traders may find that they are not
always talking about the same thing. When a trader makes the comment that the
volatility of XYZ is 25%, this statement may take on a variety of meanings. We can avoid
confusion in subsequent discussions if we first define the various ways in which traders
interpret volatility.

Future Volatility

Future volatility is what every trader would like to know, the volatility that best
describes the future distribution of prices for an underlying contract. In theory it is this
number to which we are referring when we speak of the volatility input into a
theoretical pricing model. If a trader knows the future volatility, he knows the right
“odds.” When he feeds this number into a theoretical pricing model, he can generate
accurate theoretical values because he has the right probabilities. Like the casino, he
may occasionally lose because of short-term bad luck. Butin the long run, with the odds
on his side, a trader can be fairly certain of making a profit.

Of course, traders rarely talk about the future volatility since it is impossible to
know what the future holds.

Historical Volatility

Even though one cannot know the future, if a trader intends to use a theoretical pricing
Model he must try to make an intelligent guess about the future volatility. In option
evaluation, as in other disciplines, a good starting point is historical data. What typically
has been the volatility of this contract over some period in the past? If, over the past ten
years the volatility of a contract has never been less than 10% nor greater than 30%, a
guess for the future volatility of either 5% or 40% hardly makes sense. This does not


--- 第 82 页 ---

70 Chapter 4

mean that either of these extremes is impossible (in option trading the impossible always
seems to happen sooner or later), but based on past performance, and in the absence of
any extraordinary circumstances, a guess within the historical limits of 10% and 30% is
probably more realistic than a guess outside these limits. Of course, 10% to 30% is still
a huge range, but at least the historical data offers a starting point. Additional informa-
tion may further narrow the estimate.

Note that there are a variety of ways to calculate historical volatility, but most
methods depend on choosing two parameters, the historical period over which the
volatility is to be calculated, and the time interval between successive price changes.
The historical period may be ten days, six months, five years, or any period the trader
chooses. Longer periods tend to yield an average or characteristic volatility, while
shorter periods may reveal unusual extremes in volatility. To become fully familiar with
the volatility characteristics of a contract, a trader may have to examine a wide variety
of historical time periods.

Next, the trader must decide what intervals to use between price changes. Should
he use daily price changes? Weekly changes? Monthly changes? Or perhaps he ought
to consider some unusual interval, perhaps every other day, or every week and a half.
Surprisingly, the interval which is chosen does not seem to greatly affect the result.
Although a contract may make large daily moves, yet finish a week unchanged, this is
by far the exception. A contract which is volatile from day to day is likely to be equally
volatile from week to week, or month to month. This is typified by the graphs in Figure
4-8. The data points on the three graphs represent the volatility of the S&P 500 index
over successive 50-day periods. For the solid line daily price changes were used, for the
dotted line price changes every two days were used, and for the broken line price
changes every 5 days were used. Even though the graphs occasionally diverge, for the
most part they exhibit the same general volatility levels and trends.

As a general rule, services which supply historical volatility data base their calcula-
tions on daily settlement-to-settlement price changes. If this is not the case, an explana-
tion of how the volatility was calculated will usually accompany the data. If, for
example, a service gave the volatility of a contract for the month of August as 21.6%, it
can be assumed that the calculations were made using the daily settlement-to-settlement
price changes for all the business days during that month.

Historical and future volatility are sometimes referred to as realized volatility.

Forecast Volatility

Just as there are services which will attempt to forecast future directional moves in the
price of a contract, there are also services which will attempt to forecast the future
volatility of a contract. Forecasts may be for any period, but most commonly cover
Periods identical to the remaining life of options on the underlying contract. For an
underlying contract with three months between expirations, a service might forecast
volatilities for the next three, six, and nine months. For an underlying with monthly
expirations, a service might forecast volatilities for the next one, two, and three months.
Due to the relatively recent introduction of options, volatility forecasting is still in its
infancy, and must be considered an inexact science at best. Nonetheless, a trader’s guess


--- 第 83 页 ---

71

Volatility

Aep pug Aenea
Rep fiona

:seBueyo sod uo paseq

(%) Aumelon pezienuuy

ve
Anejo, jeouojsipyy Aeg-og xepul aos d#S :s-p enBly


--- 第 84 页 ---

72 Chapter 4

about the future volatility of a contract might very well take into consideration any
volatility forecast to which he has access.
Implied Volatility

Generally speaking, future, historical, and forecast volatility are associated with an
underlying contract. We can talk about the future volatility of the S&P 500 index, or the
historical volatility of U.S. Treasury Bonds, or a forecast volatility for IBM stock. In each
case we are referring to the volatility of the underlying contract. There is, however, a
different interpretation of volatility which is associated with an option rather than with
the underlying contract.

Suppose a certain futures contract is trading at 98.50 with interest rates at 8%.
Suppose also that a 105 call with three months to expiration is available on this contract,
and that our best guess about the volatility over the next three months is 16%. If we
want to know the theoretical value of the 105 call we might feed all these inpwts into
a theoretical pricing model. Using the Black-Scholes Model, we find that the option has
a theoretical value of .96, Having done this we might compare the option’s theoretical
value to its price in the marketplace. To our surprise, we find that the option is trading
for 1.34. How can we account for the fact that we think the option is worth .96, while
the marketplace seems to believe it is worth 1.34?

One way to answer the question is to assume that everyone in the marketplace is
using the same theoretical pricing model that we are, in this case the Black-Scholes
Model. If we make this asstmption, then the discrepancy between our value of .96 and
the marketplace’s value of 1.34 must be due to a difference of opinion concerning one
or more of the inptts into the model. We can therefore start going down the list of inputs
and try to identify the culprits,

We know that it can’t be either the amount of time to expiration or the exercise
price, since these inputs are fixed in the option contract. What about the underlying
price of 98.50? Perhaps we think the price of the underlying is at 98.50, but it is really
trading at some higher price, say 99.00. Indeed, in sttch circumstances it is always wise
to double check the inputs. But suppose we still find that the underlying is at 98.50.
Even given that there is a spread between the bid and ask price, if the market is
reasonably liquid it is unlikely that the spread would be wide enough to cause a
discrepancy of .38 in the value of the option. Perhaps our problem is the interest rate of
8%. But, as we noted in the last chapter, the interest rate component is usually the least
important of the inputs into a theoretical pricing model. And in the case of futures
options, the interest rate component is often trivial. This leaves us with only one likely
culprit, and that is volatility. In some sense, the marketplace must be using a volatility
other than 16% to evaluate the 105 call.

What volatility is the marketplace using? To find out, we can ask the following
question: If we hold all other inputs constant (time to expiration, exercise price,
underlying price, interest rates}, what volatility must we feed into our theoretical pricing
model to yield a theoretical value identical to the price of the option in the marketplace?
In our example, we want to know what volatility will yield a value of 1.34 for the 105
call. Clearly the volatility has to be higher than 16%, so we might sit down with a


--- 第 85 页 ---

Volatility 73

computer programmed with the Black-Scholes Model and start to raise the volatility. If
we do, we will find that at a volatility of 18.5% the 105 call has a theoretical value of
1.34, We refer to this volatility as the implied volatility of the 105 call. It is the volatility
we must feed into our theoretical pricing model to yield a theoretical value identical to
the price of the option in the marketplace. We can also think of it as the volatility being
implied to the underlying contract through the pricing of the option in the marketplace.

When we solve for the implied volatility of an option we are assuming that the
theoretical value (the option’s price) is known, but that the volatility is unknown. In
effect, we are running the theoretical pricing model backwards to solve for this
unknown, as shown in Figure 4-9. In fact, this is easier said than done since most
theoretical pricing models cannot be reversed. However, a number of computer
programs have been written which can quickly solve for the implied volatility when all
other inputs are known.

Note that the implied volatility depends on the theoretical pricing model being
used. For some options, a different model can yield a significantly different implied
volatility. The accuracy of an implied volatility also depends on the accuracy of inputs
into the model. This not only inchides the price of the option, but the other inputs as
well. In particular, problems can occur when an option has not traded for some time,
but market conditions have changed significantly. Suppose in our example the price of
1.34 for the 105 call reflected the last trade, but that trade took place two hours ago
when the underlying futures contract was actually at 99.25. If the price of the
underlying contract is 99.25, the implied volatility of the option at a price of 1.34 is
actually 17.3%. This is a significant difference, and underscores the importance of
accurate and timely inputs when calculating implied volatilities.

Services which supply theoretical analysis of options usually include implied
volatilities. The implied volatilities may be for each option on an underlying contract,
or there may be one implied volatility which is representative of all options on the same

Figure 4-9
Using the Model to Solve for a Theoretical Value
Knowns Unknowns
Exercise Price (105) Theoretical Value
Time to Expiration (3 months) (2? = .96)

Underlying Futures Price (98.50)
Interest Rates (8%)
Volatility (16%)

Using the Model to Solve for an Implied Volatility

Knowns Unknowns
Exercise Price (105) Implied Volatility
Time to Expiration (3 months) (7? = 18.5%)

Underlying Futures Price (98.50)
Interest Rates (8%)
Option Price (1.34)


--- 第 86 页 ---

74 Chapter 4

underlying. In the latter case, the figure will usually represent an average of all the
individual implied volatilities. The single implied volatility is weighted according to
some criteria, such as volume of options traded, open interest, or, as is most common,
by assigning the greatest weight to the at-the-money options.

The implied volatility in the marketplace is constantly changing because option
prices, as well as other market conditions, are constantly changing. It is as if the
marketplace were continuously polling all participants to come up with a consensus
volatility for the underlying contract. This is not a poll in the true sense, since all traders
do not huddle together and eventually vote on the correct volatility. However, as bids
and offers are made, the trade price of an option will represent the equilibrium between
supply and demand. This equilibrium can be translated into an implied volatility.

Even though the term premium really refers to an option’s price, it is common
among traders to refer to the implied volatility as the premfum or premium level If the
current implied volatility is high by historical standards, or high relative to the recent
historical volatility of the underlying contract, a trader might say that premium levels
are high; if implied volatility is unusually low, he might say that premium levels are low.

Assuming a trader had a reliable theoretical pricing model, if he could look into a
crystal ball and determine the future volatility of an underlying contract he would be
able to accurately evaluate options on that contract. He might then look at the difference
between each option’s theoretical value and its price in the marketplace, selling any
options which were overpriced relative to the theoretical value, and buying any options
which were underpriced. If given the choice between selling one of two overpriced
options, he might simply seli the one which was most overpriced in total dollars.
However, a trader who has access to implied volatilities might use a different yardstick
for comparison. He might compare the implied volatility of an option to either a volatility
forecast, or to the implied volatility of other options on the same underlying contract.
Going back to our example of the 105 call, we might say that with a theoretical value
of .96 and a price of 1.34, the 105 call is .38 overpriced. But in volatility terms it is 2.5%
overpriced since its theoretical value is based on a volatility of 16% (the trader’s volatility
estimate) while its price is based on a volatility of 18.5% (the implied volatility). Due to
the unusual characteristics of options, it is often more useful for the serious trader to
consider an option’s price in terms of implied volatility rather than in terms of its total
dollar price.

For example, suppose a Treasury Bond 98 call is trading for 3-32 ($3,500) with a
corresponding implied volatility of 10.5%. Suppose also that a 102 call with the same
expiration date is trading for 1-16 ($1,250) with an implied volatility of 11.5%. In total
dollar terms the 102 call is $2,250 cheaper than the 98 call. Yet an experienced trader
will probably conclude that in theoretical terms the 98 call is actually less expensive
than the 102 call because the implied volatility of the 98 call is a full percentage point
less than the implied volatility of the 102 call. Does this mean that one ougnt to buy the
98 call and sell the 102 call? Not necessarily. If the future volatility of the Treasury
Bonds turns out to be 8%, then both options are overpriced; while if volatility turns out
to be 14%, both options are underpriced. Moreover, the leverage values of the options
may not be the same so that their sensitivity to changes in market conditions may, under


--- 第 87 页 ---

Volatility 75

some circumstances, make several 102 calls a more desirable purchase than one 98 call.
If we ignore these considerations, in relative terms the 98 call is a better value because
its implied volatility is lower.

While option traders may at times refer to any of the four types of volatilities, two
of these stand out in importance, the future volatility and the implied volatility. The
future volatility of an underlying contract determines the value of options on that
contract. The implied volatility is a reflection of each option’s price. These two numbers,
yalue and price, are what all traders, not just option traders, are concerned with. If a
contract has a high value and a low price, then a trader will want to be a buyer. Ifa
contract has a low value and a high price, then a trader will want to be a seller. For an
option trader this usually means comparing the future volatility with the implied
volatility. If implied volatility is low with respect to the expected future volatility, a
trader will prefer to buy options; if implied volatility is high, a trader will prefer to sell
options. Of course, future volatility is an unknown, so we tend to look at the historical
and forecast volatilities to help us make an intelligent guess about the future. But in the
final analysis, it is the future volatility which determines an option’s value.

To help the new trader understand the various types of volatility, consider the
following analogy to weather forecasting. Suppose a trader living in Chicago gets up on
a July morning and must decide what clothes to wear that day. Do you think he will
consider putting on a parka? This is not a logical choice because he knows that
historically itis not sufficiently cold in Chicago in July to warrant wearing a winter coat.
Next, he might turn on the radio or television to listen to the weather forecast. The
forecaster is predicting clear skies with temperatures around 90° (32°C). Based on this
information, our trader has reached a decision: he will wear a short sleeve shirt with no
sweater or jacket, and he certainly won’t need an umbrella. However, just to be sure,
he decides to take a look out the window to see what the people outside are wearing.
To his surprise, everyone is wearing a coat and carrying an umbrella. The people outside,
through their clothing, are ‘mp/ving completely different weather. What clothes should
the trader then wear? He must make some decision, but whom should he believe, the
weather forecaster or the people in the street? There can be no certain answer because
the trader will not know the future weather until the end of the day.

Much depends on the trader’s knowledge of local conditions. Perhaps the trader
lives in an area far removed from where the weather forecaster is located. Then he must
give added weight to local conditions. On the other hand, perhaps the people in the
street all listened to a weather forecaster who has a history of playing practical jokes.

The decision on what clothes to wear, just like every trading decision, depends on
a great many factors. Not only must the decision be made on the basis of the best
available information, but the decision must also be made with consideration for the
possibility of error. What are the benefits of being right? What are the consequences of
being wrong? If a trader fails to take an umbrella and it rains, that may be of little
consequence if the bus picks him up right outside his residence and drops him off right
outside his place of work. On the other hand, if he must walk several blocks in the rain,
he might catch the flu and be away from work for a week. The choices are never easy,
and one can only hope to make the decision that will turn out best in the long run.


--- 第 88 页 ---

76 Chapter 4

Seasonal Volatility

There is one other type of volatility with which a commodity trader may have to deal.
Certain agricultural commodities, such as corn, soybeans, and wheat, are very sensitive
to volatility factors arising from severe seasonal weather conditions. Such conditions
occur especially in the summer months when drought can destroy major portions of a
crop and catise prices to fluctuate wildly. For this reason, grains show a significant
increase in volatility during the months of June, July, and August. Conversely, they show
a significant decrease during the early spring months, before American planting has
begun but after the South American crop has been harvested. Given these factors, one
must automatically assign a higher volatility to an option contract which extends
through the summer months. If, in February, a trader has assigned a volatility of 18% to
a May soybean contract, he will certainly choose some higher volatility, perhaps 22%,
for a November contract. He knows that the November contract includes the summer
months, while the May contract does not. The effect of seasonal volatility on soybeans
is shown in Figure 4-10.

A trader who is new to options might initially question whether volatility is really
that important. He has probably been pursuing directional strategies where volatility
was not a consideration. It is also possible to pursue a variety of directional strategies in
the option market. But if a trader has a thorough understanding of volatility, he has an
additional variable with which to work. He can, in effect, approach the market from
two directions instead of one. Many traders find it easier to work exclusively with

Figure 4-10: Monthly Soybean Volatility (1980-1992)
60

507

405

307

Annulaized Volatility (%)

“SLU
104 re ee

T T T T T ~T T TT —_~T T T
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

—™ high —*- mean =& low
Courtesy of the Chicago Board of Trade.


--- 第 89 页 ---

Volatility 77

volatility, rather than try to guess market direction. Moreover, volatility strategies can
be extremely profitable and, when chosen intelligently, can even reduce a trader’s risk
exposure. These two variables, market direction and volatility, enable an option trader
to pursue many strategies not available to the pure stock or futures trader.

Changing our assumptions about future volatility can have a dramatic effect on the
yalue of options. To see this, look at the prices, theoretical values, and implied volatilities
for ten-week gold options in Figure 4-11. Note the change in theoretical values as
volatility is increased from 11% to 14% to 17%. The 360 call and put, which are
essentially at-the-money, change by approximately 1.85 ($185) for each three-percent-
age-point increase in volatility. While out-of-the-money options do not show as great a
dollar change in value, in percent terms their sensitivity to a change in volatility is even
greater. As volatility increases from 11% to 14%, the 390 call and 330 put more than
double in value, and double again as volatility increases from 14% to 17%. A three-per-
centage-point change in volatility over ten weeks is not at all uncommon. Indeed, the
volatility of gold can show swings of six or seven percentage points in a relatively short
period of time. This is evident from the historical volatility of gold shown in Figure 4-12.

Given its importance, it is not surprising that the serious option trader spends a
considerable amount of time thinking about volatility. Using his knowledge of historical,
forecast, implied, and, in the case of agricultural commodities, seasonal volatility, he

Figure 4-11

3 May 1991

August Gold Futures at 358.30
Time to expiration = 10 weeks
Interest rate = 5.50%

Exerclse Settlement Implled Theoretical Value If...

Price Price Volatility Vol. = 11% Vol. = 14% Vol. = 17%
Calls

330 29.20 15.36 28.27 28.84 29.69
340 20,60 14.48 19.26 20.40 21.73
350 13.20 13.86 11.61 13.28 15.01
360 7.80 13.89 6.02 7.87 9.73
370 4.20 14,00 2.62 4.20 5.88
380 2.40 14.93 94 2.01 3.32
390 1.40 15.93 .28 86 1.75
Puts

330 1.20 15.28 .29 87 1.72
340 2.60 14.69 117 2.31 3.64
350 5.10 14,04 3.44 5.08 6.80
360 9.50 13.92 7.70 9.55 11.41
370 15.70 13.88 14.18 15.77 17.45
380 23.70 14.57 22.40 23.47 24.78

390 32.50 15.13 31.62 32.20 33.08

a


--- 第 90 页 ---

Chapter 4

78

Le-Aew 06-AON o6-udy 69-deg 68-eW) ge-hny
es eS Ce BO

g8-q94 Z8-1n¢ 2e-uer
1 j 7)

(%) AneloA pezienuuy

ANNIOA PIOD HeomM-Ol :Z1-p eanb1y


--- 第 91 页 ---

Volatility 79

must try to make an intelligent decision about future volatility. From this, he will look
for option strategies which will be profitable when he is right, but which will not result
in a disastrous loss when he is wrong. Because of the difficulty in predicting volatility,
a trader must always look for strategies which will leave the greatest margin for error.
No trader will survive very long pursuing strategies based on a future volatility estimate
of 15% if such a strategy results in a Joss when volatility actually turns out to be 16%.
Given the shifts that occur in volatility, a one-percentage-point margin for error is no
margin for error at all.

We have not yet concluded our discussion of volatility. But before continuing, it
will be useful to look at option characteristics, trading strategies, and risk considerations.
We will then be in a better position to examine volatility in greater detail.


--- 第 92 页 ---

ae 5

Using an Option’s
Theoretical Value

From a theoretician’s point of view, the Black-Scholes Model represents a novel solution
to a complex problem. The model requires a limited number of inputs and relatively
simple mathematical calculations. These factors have made the Black-Scholes Model the
most popular of all option pricing methods.

While a trader might appreciate the elegance of the mathematics, it is still the actual
performance of the model in the marketplace which is his primary consideration. Is it
really possible to profit from price discrepancies between model-generated values and
the market prices of options?

To see how the model is intended to function, let us make two assumptions:

1. The price distribution of an underlying contract is accurately represented by a
lognormal distribution.

2. We actually know the future volatility of an underlying contract.

Clearly, the second assumption is not very realistic since we obviously don’t know the
future. As we shall see later, the first assumption is also highly questionable. But for the
time being, rather than focus on the assumptions in the model, we want to focus on its
use by a trader. If we make these assumptions, and the Black-Scholes Model does indeed
work, then we ought to be able to turn any difference between an option’s price and its
theoretical value into a profit. How should we go about doing this?

Suppose that a series of options are available on a certain futures contract with the
following conditions:

June futures price = 101.35
Interest rate = 8.00%
Time to June expiration = 10 weeks

Suppose also that the options are subject to stock-type settlement, requiring full payment
of the premium, as they currently are on U.S. markets.

Given that we can choose any exercise price we want, and that we can choose the
type of option we want (call or put), the only input we still need for accurate evaluation
of options on this futures contract is volatility. Since we have made the assumption that
we actually know the future volatility of the underlying futures contract, let’s imagine

8


--- 第 93 页 ---

82 Chapter 5

that we have a crystal ball which will teil us the future volatility. When we look into
the crystal ball we see a volatility figure of 18.3% over the next 10 weeks. Now we have
ali the necessary inputs for theoretical evaluation, and it only remains to choose a
specific option.

The June 100 call, being close to at-the-money, is likely to be actively traded, so
let’s focus on that option. Feeding our inputs into the Black Model (the futures variation
of the Black-Scholes Model), we find that the June 100 call has a theoretical value of
3.88. When we check its price in the marketplace, we find that it is being offered at
3.25. How can we profit from this discrepancy?

Clearly, our first move will be to purchase options since they are underpriced by
.63. Can we now walk away from the position and come back at expiration to collect
our money?

We noted in Chapter 3 that the purchase or sale of a theoretically mispriced option
requires us to establish a hedge by taking an opposing position in the underlying
contract. When this is done correctly, for small changes in the price of the underlying,
the increase (decrease) in the value of the option position will exactly offset the decrease
{increase) in the value of the opposing position in the underlying contract. Such a hedge
is unbiased, or neutral, as to the direction of the underlying contract.

The number which enables us to establish a neutral hedge under current market
conditions is a by-product of the theoretical pricing model and is known as the hedge
ratio or, more commonly, the delta. We will discuss the delta in greater detail in the
next chapter, but certain characteristics will be important in our present example:

1. The delta of a call option is always somewhere between 0 and 1.00.
2. The delta of an option can change as market conditions change.
3. An underlying contract always has a delta of 1.00.

Option traders commonly drop the decimal point when discussing deltas, a
convention which we will also follow. Therefore, the delta of a call will fall in the range
of 0 to 100, and an underlying contract will always have a delta of 100.1

Going back to our example, in order to make correct use of the option’s theoretical
value, we also need to know the delta, in this case 57 (.57). This means that for each
option which we purchase we must sell 57% of an underlying contract to establish an
unbiased or neutral hedge. Since the purchase or sale of fractional futures contracts is
not permitted, we intend to purchase 100 June 100 calls and sell 57 June futures
contracts. This maintains the proper neutral ratio but allows us to deal in whole
numbers of contracts. We have established the following position:

Contract Contract Delta Delta Position
Buy 100 June 100 calls 57 +5700
Sell 57 June futures 100 -5700

1. This convention originated In the U.S. stock option market where an underlying contract typically
consisted of 100 shares of stock. It became common to equate one delta with each share of stock.


--- 第 94 页 ---

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 83

Note that the delta position on each side of the hedge is the number of contracts
multiplied by the contract delta, keeping in mind that the purchase of a contract is
represented by a positive sign and the sale of a contract is represented by a negative sign.
The option delta position is therefore +100 x 57 = +5700 and the futures position is
—57 x 100 = -5700. When we add these two numbers together, +5700 and -5700,
the total delta position is zero, and we say that the position is delta neutral Within a
small range, a delta neutral position has no particular preference for either upward or
downward movement in the underlying market. If the total delta position is a positive
number, this indicates an upward bias; if the total delta position is a negative number,
this indicates a downward bias,

Having established a delta neutral hedge we must still deal with the fact that a
theoretical value is based on probability. The roulette player who is able to purchase a
roulette bet for less than its theoretical value can only expect to show a profit if he is
allowed to play many, many times. On any one bet he will most likely lose, since there
is only one way for him to win but 37 ways for him to lose. The same is true of our
hedge. The odds may be on our side because we have purchased undervalued options.
But in the short run our hedge might very well result in a loss. Is there anything we can
do to offset the possibility of short-term bad luck?

We know that in the long run the laws of probability are on our side. We can be
fairly certain of making a profit if we are given the chance to make many bets at the
same favorable odds. The more bets we make, the better our chances of making a profit
identical to that predicted by the theoretical pricing model. One way to accomplish this
is to approach the initial hedge as a continuing series of small bets. We can replicate the
long-term probability by reassessing our position at regular intervals, and then making
appropriate changes in the position so that each new interval represents a new bet.

Suppose that one week later the price of the June futures contract has moved up
to 102.26. At this point we can feed the new market conditions into our theoretical
pricing model:

June futures price = 102.26
Interest rate = 8.00%
Time to June expiration = 9 weeks
Volatility = 18.3%

Note that we have made no change in the interest rate or volatility. The theoretical
pricing model we are using, the Black model, assumes that these two inputs remain
constant over the life of the option. Based on the new inputs we can calculate the new
deita for the 100 call, in this case 62. The delta position is now:

Contract Contract Delta Delta Position
Long 100 June 100 calls 62 +6200
Short 57 June futures 100 -5700

Our total delta position is now +500. This is the end of one bet, with another about to
begin.


--- 第 95 页 ---

84 Chapter 5

Whenever we begin a new bet we are required to return to a delta neutral position.
In our example it will be necessary to reduce our position by 500 deltas. As we shall see
later, there are a number of different ways to do this. But to keep our present
calculations as simple as possible we will make the necessary trades in the underlying
futures market, since an underlying contract always has a delta of 100.

Here we wish to sell off 500 deltas, and we can do this by selling 5 futures contracts.
Our delta position is now:

Contract Contract Delta Delta Position
Long 100 June 100 calls 62 +6200
Short 62 June futures 100 6200

We are again delta neutral and about to begin a new bet. As before, ournewbet depends
only on the volatility of the underlying futures contract, and not on its direction.

The extra five futures contracts we sold were an adjustment to our position.
Adjustments are trades which are not necessarily made for the purpose of adding to the
theoretical edge, although they may also have that effect. Rather, they are made
primarily to ensure that a position remains delta neutral. In our case, the sale of the five
extra futures contracts has no effect on our theoretical edge since futures contracts have
no theoretical value. The trade was made solely for the purpose of adjusting our hedge
to remain delta neutral.

The steps we have thus far taken illustrate the correct procedure in using an
option’s theoretical value:

1. Purchase (sell) undervalued (overvalued) options.
2. Establish a delta neutral hedge against the underlying contract.
3. Adjust the hedge at regular intervals to remain delta neutral.

Since volatility is assumed to compound continuously, theoretical pricing models
assume that adjustments are also made continuously, and that the hedge is being
adjusted at every moment in time. Such continuous adjustments are not possible in the
real world, since a trader can only trade at discrete intervals. By making adjustments at
regular intervals, we are conforming as best we can to the principles of the theoretical
pricing model.

Using the proper procedure, how would the adjustment process look if we were to
carry the hedge to expiration? The results are shown in Figure 5-1. In our example
adjustments were made at weekly intervals. At the end of each interval the delta of the
June 100 call was recalculated from the time remaining to expiration, the current price
of the underlying futures contract, the fixed interest rate of 8.00%, and the known
volatility of 18.3%. Note that we have not changed the volatility, even though other
market conditions may have changed. Volatility, like interest rates, are assumed to be

2. While a futures trader might talk about the theoretical value of a futures contract, from an option
trader’s point of view the underlying contract has no theoretical value. The theoretical value is
whatever price the trader thinks he can trade the contract at.


--- 第 96 页 ---

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 85

‘ constant over the life of the option. In practice, a trader may, and often does, change
his opinion about volatility.
What will we do with our position at the end of ten weeks when the options expire?
At that time we plan to close out the position by:

1. Letting any out-of-the money options expire worthless.

2. Selling any in-themoney options at parity (intrinsic value) or, equivalently,
exercising them and offsetting them against the underlying futures contract.

3. Liquidating any outstanding futures contracts at the market price.

Let’s go through this procedure step by step and see what the complete results of our
hedge were.

Original Hedge: At June expiration (week 10) we can liquidate our June 100 calls by
either selling them at 2.54, or by selling futures at 102.54 and exercising the calls. Either
method will result in a credit of 2.54 to our account. Since we originally paid 3.25 for
each option, we have effectively lost .71 per option, and our total loss on the options is
100 x -.71 = -71,00.

As part of our original hedge we also sold 57 June futures at 101.35. At expiration
we had to buy them back at 102.54, fora loss of 1.19 per contract. Our total loss on
the futures is therefore 57 x -1.19 = -67.83. Adding this to our option loss, the total
loss on the original hedge is -71.00 -67.83 = -138.83. This certainly does not appear
to have been successful. We expected to make money on the hedge, and yet we have
a sizable loss.

Adjustments: The original hedge was not our only transaction. In order to remain delta
neutral, we were forced to buy and sell futures contracts over the ten-week life of the
option. At the end of week one we were 500 deltas long, so we had to sell 5 futures at

Figure 5-1
Total Total Interest
Futures Delta of Delta Adjustment Futuree on

Week Price 100Cali Poeltlon In Futures Adjustment Variation Variation

(0) 101.35 57 0 0 0 ie) 0

1 102.26 62 +500 sell 5 5 ~51.87 —72

2 99.07 46 —1,600 buy 16 +11 +197.78 +2.43

3 100.39 53 +700 sell 7 +4 ~60.72 —.65

4 100.76 56 +300 sell 3 +1 ~19.61 —.18

5 403.59 74 +1,800 sell 18 -17 —158.48 -1.22

6 99.26 45 ~2,900 buy 29 +12 +320.42 +1.97

7 98,28 35 —1,000 buy 10 +22 +44,10 +.20

8 99,98 50 +4,500 sell 15 +7 59.50 —.18

9 403.78 93 +4,300 sell 43 -36 —190,00 —.29

10 402.54 buy 36


--- 第 97 页 ---

86 Chapter §

102.26, At the end of week two we were 1600 deltas short, so we had to buy 16 futures
at 99.07; and so on each week until the end of week ten. At expiration we were short
an extra 36 futures contracts, and we bought these in at the closing price of 102.54,
Note that each time the futures price rose our delta position became positive, so that
we were forced to sell futures; and each time the futures price fell our delta position
became negative, so that we were forced to buy futures. Because our adjustments
depended on the delta position, we were forced to do what every trader wants to do:
buy low and sell high.

What was the result of all the adjustments required to maintain a delta neutral
position? In fact the result was a profit of 205.27. (The reader may wish to confirm this
by adding up the cash flow from all the trades in the adjustment column in Figure 5-1.)
This profit more than offset the losses incurred from the original hedge.

Carrying Costs: What else will effect our final profit or loss? Originally we bought calls
and sold futures. While futures are subject to futures-type settlement and require no
initial cash outlay, the options are subject to stock-type settlement and require full
payment. We bought 100 calls for 3.25 each, for a total outlay of 325.00. Based on our
assumed 8.00% interest rate, the carrying cost on 325,00 for 10 weeks is .08 x 70/365
x 325.00 = 4.99. We will have to include this debit of 4.99 in our final calculations.

Variation Costs: Finally, we must take into consideration the variation costs required
to maintain our futures position. As futures move up or down in price, cash is either
credited to, or debited from, a trader’s account. In theory, a trader can earn interest on
a cash credit, but must pay interest on a cash debit. For example, we initially sold 57
futures contracts at 101.35. One week later the futures price rose to 102.26, so our
account was debited 57 x (101.35 - 102.26) = -51.87. Financing this debit for nine
weeks at 8.00% cost us—51.87 x .08 x 63/365 =~.72. In order to remain delta neutral
at the end of week one we sold an additional five futures contracts, for a new total of
short 62 futures. One week later (week 2) the futures price fell to 99.07, so our account
was credited 62 x (102.26 — 99.07) = +197.78. The amount of interest we were able
to earn on this credit for 8 weeks at 8.00% was +197.78 x .08 x 56/365 = +2.43. The
cash flow resulting from futures variation is shown in Figure 5-1 under the “variation”
column, and the resulting interest is shown under the “interest on variation” column.
The total interest is +1.36.

We can now summarize all the profit and loss components resulting from our
position:

Original Hedge Adjustments Option Carrying Costs Variation Costs
-138.83 +205.27 4,99 +1.36

The total profit is -138.83 +205.27 -4.99 +1.36 = +62.81. How much did the
theoretical pricing model predict we would make? We bought 100 calls worth 3.88 for
3.25 each, for a total theoretical edge of 100 x (3.88 — 3.25) = 100 x .63 = +63.00. In
other words, the theoretical model came very close to predicting the actual profit from
the position.


--- 第 98 页 ---

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 87

In our example, the profit and loss was made up of four components. Two of these
were profitable (the adjustments and the variation costs} while two were unprofitable
(the original hedge and the option carrying costs). Is this always the case? It is impossible
to determine beforehand which components will be profitable and which will not. One
could just as easily construct an example where the original hedge was profitable and
the adjustments were not. The important point here is that if a trader’s inputs are
correct, in some combination he can expect to show a profit (or loss) approximately
equal to that predicted by the theoretical pricing model.

Of all the inputs, volatility is the only one which is not directly observable. Where
did our volatility figure of 18.3% come from? Obviously, one can’t know the future
yolatility, but in this case the author took the ten price changes in Figure 5-1 and
calculated the annualized standard deviation of the logarithmic changes (the volatility).
Hence, the volatility of 18.3% was the correct volatility for this series of price changes.
The complete calculations are given in Appendix B.

In the foregoing example we assumed that the market was frictionless, that no
external factors affected the total profit or loss. This assumption is basic to many
economic models, including the Black-Scholes Model. In a frictionless market we
assume that:

1, Traders can freely buy or sell the underlying contract without restriction
2. All traders can borrow and lend money at the same rate.

3. Transaction costs are zero.

4, There are no tax considerations.

A trader will immediately realize that option markets are not frictionless, since each
of the above assumptions is violated to a greater or lesser degree in the real world. For
example, in certain futures markets there is a daily limit on the amount of allowable
price movement. When this limit ts reached, the market is said to be locked, and no
further trading can take place until the price of the futures contract comes off its limit.2
Clearly, in such a market the underlying contract cannot always be freely bought or sold.

Additionally, individual traders cannot generally borrow or lend money at the same
rate as large financial institutions. If a trader has a debit balance, it will cost him more
to carry that dehit; if he has a credit balance, he will not earn as much on that credit.
There is a spread, and perhaps a fairly large one, between a trader’s borrowing and
lending rate. Fortunately, as we discussed in Chapter 3, the interest rate component is
usually the least important of the inputs into a theoretical pricing model. Even though
the applicable interest rate may vary from trader to trader, in general it will only cause
small changes in the total profit or loss in relation to the profit or ioss resulting from
other inputs.

3. It is sometimes possible to circumvent the problem of a locked market by either buying or selling the
physical commodity rather than the futures contract, or by trading spreads between futures months if
one of the months is not locked.


--- 第 99 页 ---

88 Chapter 5

Transaction costs, on the other hand, can bea very real consideration. If such costs
are high, the hedge in Figure 5-1 might not be a viable strategy; all the profits could be
eaten up by brokerage fees. In theory, the desirability of a strategy will depend not only
on the trader’s initial transaction costs, but also on the subsequent costs of making
adjustments. The adjustment cost is a function of a trader’s desire to remain delta
neutral. A trader who wants to remain delta neutral at every moment will have to adjust
more often, and more adjustments mean more transaction costs.

Suppose a trader initiates a hedge but adjusts less frequently, or does not adjust at
all. How will this affect the outcome? Since theoretical evaluation of options is based
on the laws of probability, a trader who initiates a theoretically profitable hedge still has
the odds on his side. Although he may lose on any one individual hedge, if given a
chance to initiate the same hedge repeatedly at a positive theoretical edge, on average
he should profit by the amount predicted by the theoretical pricing model, assuming, of
course, that his inputs are correct. The adjustment process is simply a way of smoothing
out the winning and losing hedges by forcing the trader to make more bets, always at
the same favorable odds. A trader’s disinclination to adjust simply means that there is
greater risk of not realizing a profit on any one hedge. Adjustments do not in themselves
alter the expected return; they simply reduce the possibility of short-term bad luck.

Based on the foregoing discussion, a retail customer and a professional trader are
likely to approach option trading in a slightly different manner, even though both
understand and use the values generated by a theoretical pricing model. A professional
trader, particularly if he is an exchange member, has relatively low transaction costs.
Since adjustments cost him practically nothing in relation to the expected theoretical
profit from a hedge, he is willing to make frequent adjustments. However, a retail
customer who establishes the same hedge will probably not adjust, or will adjust less
frequently, because any adjustments are likely to significantly reduce the profitability of
a hedge. But if he understands the laws of probability, the retail! customer will realize
that his position has the same favorable odds as the professional trader’s position. At the
same time he should realize that his position is more sensitive to short-term bad luck.
Even though the retail customer may occasionally experience larger losses than the
professional trader, he will also occasionally experience larger profits. In the long run,
on average, both should end up with approximately the same profit.4

Taxes may also be a factor in evaluating an option strategy. When positions are
initiated, when they are liquidated, how the positions overlap, and the relationship
between different instruments (options, stock, futures, physical commodities, etc.} may
have different tax consequences. Such consequences can often have a significant impact
on the value of a diversified portfolio, and for this reason portfolio managers must be
sensitive to the tax ramifications of a strategy. Since each trader has unique tax
considerations, and this book is intended as a general guide to option evaluation and
strategies, we will simply assume that each trader wishes to maximize his theoretical
pre-tax profits and that he will worry about taxes afterward.

4. This of course ignores the very real advantage the professional trader often has from being able to buy
at the bid price and sell at the ask price. A retail customer can never hope to match the profit resulting
from this advantage, nor should he try to do so.


--- 第 100 页 ---

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 89

Returning to our example in Figure 5-1, note that after the hedge was initiated no
subsequent trades were made in the option market. The trader’s only concern was the
volatility, or price fluctuations, in the underlying market. These price fluctuations
determined the size and the frequency of the adjustments, and in the final analysis it
was the adjustments which determined the profitability of the hedge. We might think
of the hedge as a race between the loss in time value of the June 100 calls and the cash
flow resulting from the adjustments, with the theoretical pricing model acting as the
judge. The model says that if options are purchased at less than theoretical value, the
adjustments will win the race; if options are purchased at more than theoretical value,
the loss in time value will win the race. The conditions of the race are determined by
the inputs into the theoretical pricing model.

While we assumed in our example that the future volatility was known to be
18.3%, we might ask what the outcome would have been had volatility been other than
18.3%? Suppose, for example, it turned out to be higher than 18.3%. Higher volatility
means greater price fluctuations, resulting in more and larger adjustments. In our
example, more adjustments mean more profit. This is consistent with the principle that
options increase in value as volatility increases.

What about the reverse, if volatility had been less than 18.3%? Lower volatility
means smaller price fluctuations, resulting in fewer and smaller adjustments. This would
have reduced the profit. If the volatility were low enough, the adjustment profit would
just be enough to offset the other components, so that the total profit from the hedge
would be exactly zero. This break-even volatility is identical to the option’s implied
volatility at the trade price. Using the Black model, we find that the implied volatility of
the June 100 call at a price of 3.25 is 14.6%. At that volatility the race between profits
from the adjustments and the loss in the option’s time value will end in an exact tie.
Above a volatility of 14.6% we expect the hedge, including adjustments, to show a
profit; below 14.6% we expect the hedge to show a loss.

Since we needed to make adjustments in order to realize a profit, it may seem that
every profitable hedge requires us to maintain the position until expiration. In practice,
however, this may not be necessary. Suppose, for example, that immediately after we
established the hedge the implied volatility in the option market began to increase.
Suppose that it increased from 14.6%, the implied volatility when we bought the June
100 calls, to 18.3%, the future volatility over the life of the option. What would happen
to the price of the June 100 cail? Its price would rise from 3.25 (an implied volatility of
14.6%) to 3.88 (an implied volatility of 18.3%). We could then sell our calls for an
immediate profit of .63 per option. Of course, if we wanted to close out the hedge we
would also have to buy back the 57 June futures contracts which we originally sold.
What effect would the change in implied volatility have on the price of the futures
contracts? Implied volatility is a characteristic associated with options, not with under-
lying contracts. For this reason we would expect to see the underlying futures contract
continue to trade at its original price of 101.35. By purchasing our 57 outstanding
futures contracts at 101.35 we would realize an immediate total profit from the hedge
of 63.00, exactly the amount predicted by the theoretical pricing model. If we could do
all this, there would be no reason to hold the position for the full ten weeks.


--- 第 101 页 ---

90 Chapter 5

How likely is an immediate reevaluation in implied volatility from 14.6% to 18.3%?
While violent changes in implied volatility are possible, they are the exception rather
than the rule. Changes usually occur gradually over a period of time, and are the result
of equally gradual changes in the volatility of the underlying contract. As the volatility
of the underlying contract changes, option demand either rises or falls, and this demand
is reflected in a corresponding rise or fall in the implied volatility. In our example, if
Market participants realized that the price of the underlying futures contract were
fluctuating at a volatility greater than 14.6%, we would expect implied volatility to begin
to rise. If implied volatility ever reached our target of 18.3%, we could sell out our calls
and buy in our futures, thereby realizing our expected profit of 63.00 without having
to hold the position for the full ten weeks. However, option prices are subject to a wide
variety of market forces, not all of them theoretical. There is no guarantee that implied
volatility will ever reevaluate up to 18.3%. In that case, we will have to hold the position
for the full ten weeks and continue to adjust in order to realize our profit.

Every trader hopes for quick reevaluation of implied volatility towards his volatility
forecast. It not only enables him to realize his profits more quickly, but it eliminates the
risk of holding a position for an extended period of time. The longer a position is held,
the greater the possibility of error from the inputs into the model.

Not only might implied volatility not reevaluate favorably, it might actually move
against us, even if the true volatility of the underlying contract moves in our favor.
Suppose that after initiating our hedge, implied volatility immediately falls to 13.5%
from 14.6%. The price of the June 100 call will fall from 3.25 to 3.06. Now we have a
paper loss of 100 x —19 =--19.00. Does this mean we made a bad trade and should
close out the position? Not necessarily. If the volatility forecast of 18.3% turns out to be
correct, the options will still be worth 3.88 by expiration. If we hold the position and
adjust, we can eventually expect a profit of 63.00. Realizing this, we ought to maintain
the position as we originally intended. Even though an adverse move in implied
volatility is unpleasant, it is something with which all traders must learn to cope. Just
as a spectator can rarely hope to pick the exact bottom or top at which to take a long
or short position, an option trader can rarely hope to pick the exact bottom or top in
implied volatility. He must try to establish positions when market conditions are
favorable. But he must also realize that conditions might become even more favorable.
if they do, his initial trade may show a temporary loss. This is something a trader learns
to accept as a practical aspect of trading.

Let’s look at a somewhat more complex hedge, this time in the form of mispriced
stock options. Suppose current market conditions are as follows:

Stock price = 484

Interest rate = 8.00%

Time to March expiration = 10 weeks
Expected dividend = 50¢ in 40 days

Note that we now have an additional input, the expected dividend. Of course, we
still need the volatility over the life of the option. Again looking into our crystal ball, we


--- 第 102 页 ---

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 91

see that the volatility over the next 10 weeks will be 32.4%. Again, we decide to look
at a call which is close to at-the-money, specifically the March 50 call. Feeding all of our
inputs into the Black-Scholes model, we find that the March 50 call has a theoretical
value of 2.17 and a delta of 46.

Having determined the theoretical value of the call, we still need its price in order
to see if there is any profit opportunity available. In this case, it turns out that the call is
trading for 3 (an implied volatility of 42.2%). Since the option is overpriced, we want
to sell it and establish a delta neutral hedge against the underlying contract. We might,
for example, sell 100 March 50 calls and simultaneously buy 46 stock contracts.
Assuming this option is trading on a U.S. stock options exchange where each underlying
contract consists of 100 shares of stock, it will be necessary to buy 4600 shares of stock.

Asin alt hedges based on a theoretically mispriced option, it is necessary to maintain
a delta neutral position throughout the life of the option. As before, we will make our
adjustments at weekly intervals, but now the underlying contract is shares of stock.
Figure 5-2 shows the adjustment process for this hedge. Let’s go through the hedge step
by step and see what the final results are.

Original Hedge: At expiration, with the stock at 523, the 50 calls were worth 234.
So on the option we showed a profit of $300 — $237.50, or $62.50. The 4600 shares
of stock we purchased at 48% we were able to sell at 525, for a profit of 37% ($3.875}
per share. The total hedge profit was therefore +(100 x $62.50} +(4600 x $3.875) =
+$24,075.

Adjustments: The adjustment process forced us to buy and sell stock to remain delta
neutral. At week one we bought 600 shares of stock at 495; at week two we bought
1400 shares at 521; at week three we sold 200 shares at 5144; and so on. At week
ten we sold out our remaining 900 shares of stock at 5244. The result of all these

Figure 5-2
Stock Deltaof Total Delta Adjustment Total Share Interest on
Week Price 50call Position inShares Adjustment Cash Flow Cash Flow
0 48% ce) 0 0 0 fe) 0
1 49% 52 -600 buy 600 +600 —23,775 411.14
2 52% 66 -1400 buy 1,400 +2000 -72,975 895.69
3 51% 64 +200 sell 200 +1800 +10,350 4111.16
4 50 52 +1200 sell 1,200 +600 +60,000 +552.33
5 47 28 +2400 sell 2,400 -1800 +112,800 +865.32
ex-dividend 50¢
6 48% 38 -1000 buy 1,000 —800 ~48,125 —295.34
7 52 73 -3500 buy 3,500 +2700 182,000 -837.70
8 52% 78 500 buy 500 +3200 -26,125 ~80.16
9 50% 55 +2300 sell 2,300 +900 +115,288 +176.88

10 52% sell 900 +47,138


--- 第 103 页 ---

92 Chapter S

adjustments was a loss of $13,425, (Again, the reader may wish to confirm this by
adding up all the numbers in the “cash flow” column.}

Carrying Costs on the Initial Position: Originally we sold 100 options at $300 each,
and bought 4600 shares of stock at $48.50 each. This resulted in a total debit of (100
x $300) - (4600 x $48.50} = $193,100. The carrying cost on this debit for ten weeks
at an annual rate of 8.00% (our interest rate assumption} was $193,100 x .08 x 70/365
= $2,962.63. Note that this is somewhat different than the futures example, where only
the option contracts entailed a carrying cost. Unlike futures trades, the purchase or sale
of stock results in an immediate cash flow, and this cash flow becomes part of the
carrying cost on the initial hedge.

Interest on the Adjustments: Whenever we bought or sold stock to make an
adjustment, the trade resulted in a cash flow, either a debit or a credit. We were able
to earn interest on any credit, and we were required fo pay interest on any debit, ata
rate of 8.00 percent. For example, at week one we bought 600 shares of stock at
495, for a total cash outlay of $29,775. The cost of carrying this debit to expiration
(nine weeks hence} was -$29,775 x 63/365 x .08 = -$411.14. The total interest cost
from our adjustments is the sum of all the individual interest calculations, or -$81 4.34.

Dividends: We also assumed that 30 days prior to expiration (between week five and
six) the stock paid a dividend of 50¢. What was the dividend earnings or loss to our
position? We initially bought 4,600 shares of stock. At the end of week five we were
short 1800 shares of stock as part of the adjustment process. This means that on the
ex-dividend date we were long a total of 2800 shares of stock. At a dividend of 50¢ per
share, we received a dividend payout $1,400.

Interest on Dividends: We were also able to earn interest on the $1,400 dividend
payout for the remaining 30 days to expiration at a rate of 8.00%. The proceeds from
this were $1,400 x 30/365 x .08 = $9.21.

Summarizing the results, we have:

Original Interest on Interest on Interest on
Hedge Adjustments Hedge Adjustments Dividends Dividends
+$24,075 -$13,425 -$2,962.63 -$814.34 +$1,400 +$9.21

The total profit on the hedge is therefore:
+$24,075 -$13,425 -$2,962.63 -$814.34 +$1,400 +$9.21 = +$8,282.24

versus a theoretical profit of 100 x ($300 - $217) = 100 x $83 = +$8,300.

As in our last example, our profit depended on our knowing the volatility of the
underlying contract over the life of the option. This “known” volatility of 32.4%
represents the actual volatility associated with the ten stock price changes in Figure 5-2.

While we continue to assume that markets are frictionless, we noted in our futures
option example that this is not necessarily true. In a locked futures market it is not
always possible to freely buy and sell the underlying contract. A similar type of


--- 第 104 页 ---

Using an Option’s Theoretical Value 93

restriction can occur in stock option trading. In our example we established the initial
hedge by selling calls and purchasing stock. If, however, the calls had been underpriced,
we might have chosen to buy calls and sell stock, stock which we might not necessarily
own. This type of short sale, the sale of stock which is borrowed rather than owned, is
prohibited in some markets. This makes it difficult to hedge certain types of option
positions. As we shall see later, if we choose to sell puts it is necessary to hedge the
position by selling stock. If we are not able to sell stock to hedge the sale of puts, we
might hesitate to sell puts, even at a price greater than the theoretical value. Indeed, in
markets where short sales are prohibited, puts tend to trade at inflated prices compared
to calls,

The short sale of stock is not totally prohibited in U.S. markets, but it is subject to
an up-tick rule. This rule specifies that a short sale is always prohibited at a price lower
than the price at which the previous trade took place (a down-tick). A short sale is
always permitted at a price higher than the price at which the previous trade took place
(an up-tick). Finally, a short sale may take place at the same price at which the previous
trade took place if the previous trade took place on an up-tick (also an up-tick). The
up-tick rule was instituted following the market crash of 1929, with the intent of
preventing a similar crash by prohibiting the sale, at continuously lower prices, of stock
not actually owned. Below are ten consecutive trade prices (reading from left to right]
for a stock with the accompanying ticks (a positive sign for an up-tick; a negative sign
for a down-tick}.

4812 +48%% +4854 —4814 -48%% -481%4 4814 +48% +4896 +4852

Not only might a short sale not be possible because of the up-tick rule, but many
brokerage firms which execute short sales of stock for their customers do not pay full
interest on the proceeds from a short sale. This can further distort the interest
component used in a theoretical pricing model.

Taking one last look at our examples, what enabled us to make a profit approxi-
mately equal to that predicted by the theoretical pricing model? A simple way of
interpreting the results is to realize that, according to the model, the option’s cash flow
can be replicated through the adjustment process. If we know the conditions of an
option contract and the characteristics of the underlying contract, we can replicate the
characteristics of the option, and therefore replicate the cash flow resulting from a
position in the option, through an adjustment process in the underlying contract. In our
examples, because we knew the exact market conditions which would prevail over the
life of the options (primarily, this means knowing volatility), we knew we could replicate
the option by continuously calculating the delta and taking an appropriate offsetting
position in the underlying contract. According to the model, at expiration the total cash
flow from this dynamic hedge should exactiy equal the value of the option. But in our
examples we either bought the option at less than theoretical value (our futures option
example} or sold the option at more than theoretical value (our stock option example).
Since the cash flow from the adjustment process exactly replicated the option’s
theoretical value, we were left with a profit equal to the difference between the option’s
price and its theoretical value.


--- 第 105 页 ---

94 Chapter 5

This type of option replication, using the cash flow from continuous hedging in the
underlying contract, is the basis for many strategies which make use of option charac-
teristics but do not actually involve options. We will discuss the best known of these
strategies, portfolio insurance, in Chapter 13.


--- 第 106 页 ---

a 6 &

Option Values and Changing
Market Conditions

Every trader who enters the marketplace must balance two opposing considerations,
reward and risk. A trader hopes that his analysis of market conditions is correct, and
that this will lead to profitable trading strategies. But no intelligent trader can afford to
ignore the possibility of error. If he is wrong, and market conditions change in a way
that adversely affects his position, how badly might the trader get hurt? A trader who
fails to consider the risks associated with his position is certain to have a short and
unhappy career.

Consider the trader who goes into the marketplace and purchases a futures
contract. What is he worried about? Obviously he is worried that the market will fall.
Indeed, anyone who takes a position in an underlying contract has only one real
concern, that the market will move in the wrong direction. If a trader has a long
position, he is at risk from a decline in the market; if he has a short position, he is at risk
from a rise in the market.

Unfortunately, the risks with which an option trader must deal are not one-dimen-
sional. A wide variety of forces can affect an option’s value. If a trader uses a theoretical
pricing model to evaluate options, any of the inputs into the model can represent a risk
since there is always a chance that the inputs have been incorrectly estimated. Even if
the trader has correctly estimated current market conditions, it’s possible that over time
conditions will change in a way that will adversely affect the value of his option position.
Because of the many forces affecting an option’s value, prices can change in ways which
May surprise even the most experienced trader. Since decisions must often be made
quickly, and sometimes without the aid of a computer, much of an option trader’s
education consists of learning how changing market conditions are likely to change an
option’s value and the risks associated with an option position.

First, let’s consider the general effects of changing market conditions on an option’s
value. These changes are summarized in Figure 6-1.

As the price of the underlying rises or falls, options are more or less likely to finish
in-the-money, and their values rise and fall accordingly. As volatility rises, extreme
outcomes in the underlying contract become more likely, and this increases an option’s
value. As volatility falls, or as time to expiration grows shorter, extreme outcomes
become less likely, and this reduces an option’s value.

95


--- 第 107 页 ---

96 Chapter 6

Figure 6-1: The Effect of Changing Market Conditions on an Option’s
Theoretical Value

If... Call values will... Put values willl...
The price of the underlying contract rises rise fall
The price of the underlying contract falls fall rise
Volatility rises rise rise
Volatility falls falt falt
Time passes tall” fall”

* In some unusual cases it may be possible for an option to rise in value as time passes. The
circumstances which can cause this will be discussed later.

Note that we have not considered the effect of changes in interest rates on option
values. Since interest rates affect options differently depending on the underlying
instrument and the settlement procedure, it is not possible to generalize about the effect
of changing interest rates. However, we can logically deduce the effect of changing
interest rates on option values by thinking of a call as a substitute for purchasing the
underlying contract, and a put as a substitute for selling the underlying contract. For
example, suppose we want to purchase a certain stock. The alternative is to purchase a
call option. If interest rates are high, we will prefer the call since the outright purchase
of stock requires a much larger cash outlay, and therefore a greater carrying cost. On
the other hand, if interest rates are low, the carrying cost associated with stock is not as
great, and calls become a less attractive alternative to purchasing the stock. Hence,
rising interest rates cause stock option calls to rise in value, and falling interest rates
cause stock option calls to fall in value.

The effect is just the opposite for stock option puts. If we are considering the sale
of stock, the alternative is the purchase of a put. In a high interest rate environment the
sale of stock will be more desirable since the cash credit resulting from the sale will earn
greater interest. In a low interest rate environment puts become more attractive since
the earnings on any cash credit resulting from the sale of stock is reduced. Hence, rising
interest rates cause stock option puts to fall in value, and falling interest rates cause stock
option puts to rise in value.

The situation is more complex when it comes to options on foreign currencies
because a trader must deal with two interest rates, a domestic rate and a foreign rate.
The effect of changes in domestic interest rates will be the same as the effect on stock
options: a call will avoid the cash outlay required to purchase the currency, and a put
will forego the cash credit resulting from the sale of the currency. However, the effect
of a change in the foreign interest rate will be just the opposite. If foreign interest rates
are high, rather than purchase a call one will always prefer to purchase the currency
outright in order to earn the higher interest rate. Hence, higher (lower) foreign interest
rates lead to lower (higher) call values, But if foreign rates are high, a put becomes a


--- 第 108 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 97

more desirable alternative to selling the foreign currency since one will want to continue
to earn a high rate on the foreign currency. Hence, higher (lower) foreign interest rates
lead to higher (lower) put values.

Stock and foreign currency options are always assumed to be subject to stock-type
settlement (immediate cash payment for the option). But the settlement procedure for
options on futures contracts may vary, depending on the exchange. Sometimes such
options are settled like stock and sometimes they are settled like futures. While there is
no carrying cost associated with a futures contract, there will be a carrying cost
associated with an option if it is subject to stock-type settlement. In such a case, option
values will fall when interest rates are high (the option becomes a less desirable
alternative to a position in the futures contract} and rise when interest rates are low (the
option becomes a more desirable alternative to a futures position). The effect, however,
will be small since the value of the option, unless it is very deeply in-the-money, is small
relative to the value of the underlying contract. Futures options are therefore much less
sensitive to changes in interest rates than options on stocks and foreign currencies.
When futures options are subject to futures-type settlement, changes in interest rates
have no effect at all on option values since there is no carrying cost associated with either
the underlying contract or the option.

The general effects of a change in interest rates are shown in Figure 6-2. In each
case, the reader can intuitively arrive at the correct conclusion if he asks himself
whether a call (put) is a better or worse substitute for the outright purchase (sale) of the
underlying contract.

The dividend which is expected to be paid on stock during the life of a stock option
may also affect the value of the option. In a simple sense, we can equate a dividend
payment with the foreign interest rate on a currency option. If we own the foreign
currency we can earn interest on it. In the same way, if we own the stock we will receive
whatever dividend is paid on the stock. If dividends increase, we will prefer to take a
long position by purchasing the stock rather than purchasing a call. The call therefore
becomes a less desirable alternative to owning the stock. In the case of puts, if dividends
increase we will prefer to take a short position by purchasing a put rather than selling
the stock, since the sale of the stock will result in the loss of the dividend. Hence, rising
dividends will cause stock option calls (puts) to fall (rise) in value, and falling dividends
will cause stock option calls (puts) to rise (fall) in value. This is summarized in Figure
6-3.

We can generalize about the effects of changing market conditions on the value of
options, but we must still consider the magnitude of the changes. Will the changes be
large or small, representing either a major or minor risk, or something in between?
Fortunately, along with the theoretical value, pricing models also generate several other
numbers which enable a trader to assess not only the direction of the change, but also
the relative magnitude of the change. While these numbers will not answer all our
questions concerning changing market conditions, they will help us to better assess the
risks associated with both individual and complex option positions.


--- 第 109 页 ---

Chapter 6

(ajqealdde jou)
(a1qeoydde you)
(ajqeolidde jou)

(alqeoldde you)
ONILA Ul 1B}
anyea ul esu

(a[qeoljdde you)

(a|qeaydde you)

ley soyey
yseauoquy

uBjo1o4 J

(ajqeoydde jou)
(ajqeoydde jou)
(ajqeoydde you)

(ajqeoydde you)
@njeA ul esu
ONjBA U! {TE}

(a|qeoydde you)

(e)qeoydde you)

asiy seyey
ySeJ9} tj
uBbjaios JI

peBueyoun ulewial
peBueyoun ulpwel
anjea ul asu

enjeA Ul esu
ONyeA Ul OSU
OnfeA Ut fe}
NBA ul esu
ANyeA ul [et

lea soyey
ysouoruj
ofsewog jj

peBueyoun urewes

peBueyoun urewies

anyen uj jes

enter Ul {fe}
anjeA Ut je]
anjeA ul esl
ane ui |e}
@N/eA Ul OSU

9esty SoeY
ysale]4]
afseuiog JI

(juewenjes edAy seunjn})
“+ HIM J9e1]U09 SeINyN} B UO S]Nd

(juawaljes edAy seunjn))
IM JORNUOD SOINjNj B UO sI]BO

(uewaes adAy 4Oo}s)
"HIM YORIJUOD SAINjNj UO s]nd

Quawapes ad 4Oo;s)
“+ HIM JORMUOD SaINjNj B UO SBD

“++ Him Aouaune UBieloj & UO s]Nd
"++ WM AQUaUNS UBIasO} B UO S]}ED
IM 490} UO s]Nd
IM YOO}S UO SI}BO

soso} Uj

98

senje, uoido UO soyey yse10} BuiBueys jo joey ey) :2-9 einBl4

NN ee ee”. OOO


--- 第 110 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Canditions 99

Figure 6-3: The Effect of Changing Dividends on Stock Options

If... Call values will... Put values will...
The dividend is increased fall rise
The dividend is decreased rise fall

THE DELTA

We touched on the delta (A) in the last chapter as needed to determine the number of
underlying contracts to option contracts required to establish a neutral hedge. The delta
has several other interpretations, any of which may be useful to a trader.

Rate of Change

Figure 6-4! shows what happens to the theoretical value of a call as the price of the
underlying contract changes. Under some conditions, when the call is very deeply
in-the-money, its value changes at a rate almost identical to that of the underlying. If the
underlying price moves up or down one point, the call’s value will change by an equal
amount. Under other conditions, when the call is far out-of-the-money, its value may
change only slightly, even with a large change in the price of the underlying. The delta
is a measure of how an option’s value changes with respect to a change in the price of
the underlying contract.

In theory, an option can never gain or lose value more quickly than the underlying,
so the delta of a call always has an upper bound of 100. (Again, we will retain the
common practice of writing the delta without the decimal point. Hence, a detta of 1.00
will be written as 100, This is sometimes referred to as the percent format.) An option
with a delta of 100 will move up or down one full point for each full point move up or
down in the price of the underlying. It is moving at 100% of the rate of the underlying.
In theory, a call also cannot move in the opposite direction of the underlying market,
so the delta of a call has a lower bound of zero. A call with a delta of zero will move
negligibly, even if the underlying contract makes a relatively large move.

Most calls, of course, will have deltas somewhere between zero and 100 and will
move at a slower rate than the underlying. A call with a delta of 25 can be expected to
change its value at 25% of the rate of the underlying. If the underlying rises (falls) 1.00,
the option can be expected to rise (fall) .25. A call with a delta of 75 can be expected
to change its value at 75% of the rate of the underlying. If the underlying rises (falls)
.60, the option can be expected to gain (lose} .45 in value. Call options which are
at-the-money have delta values close to 50. They rise or fall in value at just about half
the rate of the underlying.

Thus far our discussion of deltas has focused only on calls. Puts have characteristics
similar to calls, except that put values move in the opposite direction of the underlying
market, In Figure 6-5 we can see that when the underlying rises, puts lose value; when

1. In order to generalize characteristics of the option sensitivities, which in most cases are similar
regardless of the type of underlying instrument, we assume an interest rate of zero in Figures 6-4
through 6-21.


--- 第 111 页 ---

100 Chapter 6

Figure 6-4: Call Theoretical Value vs. Underlying Price

30
Time = 60 days
Volatility = 20%
257
207

Theoretical Value
a
t

107

a T T T *
go 85 90 9 100 105 110 115 120
Underlying Price
Figure 6-5: Put Theoretical Value vs. Underlying Price
30 D
Time = 60 days °
254 . Volatility = 20%
o 207.
$ *x110
8 15- s. :
2 .
5 400
raj ~ 10
F104 .
90 a _
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120

Underlying Price


--- 第 112 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 101

the underlying fails, puts gain value. For this reason, puts always have negative deltas,
ranging from zero for far out-of the money puts to —100 for deeply in-the-money puts.
Just like a call delta, a put’s delta is a measure of the rate of change in the put’s value
with respect to a change in the price of the underlying, but the negative sign indicates
that the change will be in the opposite direction of the underlying market. A put with
a delta of -10 can be expected to change its value at 10% of the rate of the underlying,
but in the opposite direction. If the underlying moves up (down) .50, the put can be
expected to lose (gain) .05 in value. At-the-money puts will have deltas of approximately
50, and can be expected to change their value at approximately half the rate of the
underlying, but in the opposite direction.

Hedge Ratio

As discussed in Chapter 5, if we wish to hedge an option position against the underlying
contract, the delta tells us the proper ratio of underlying contracts to options required
to establish a neutral hedge. An underlying contract always has a delta of 100, so the
proper hedge ratio can be determined by dividing 100 by the option’s delta. An
at-the-money option has a delta of 50, so the proper hedge ratio is 100/50, or 2/1. For
every two options purchased, we need to sell one underlying contract to establish a
neutral hedge. A call with a delta of 40 requires the sale of two underlying contracts for
each five options purchased, since 100/40 = 5/2,

Since puts have negative deltas, the purchase of puts will require us to hedge the
position by purchasing underlying contracts. A put with a delta of -75 will require the
purchase of three underlying contracts for each four puts purchased, since 100/75 = 4/3.

Thus far, all the hedges we have looked at have consisted of options and underlying
contracts. But any hedge, whether options versus underlying contracts, or options
versus options, is delta neutral as long as all the deltas in the hedge add up to zero, For
example, suppose we buy four calls with a delta of 50 each, and ten puts with a delta
of —20 each. Our position is delta neutral since (+4 x +50) + (+10 x -20) = 0. A position
can be highly complex, consisting of underlying contracts, calls, and puts, with different
exercise prices and expiration dates, but as long as the deltas add up to approximately
zero we say that the position is delta neutral.

Theoretical or Equivalent Undertying Position

Many option traders come to the option market after trading in the underlying
instruments. Futures option traders often start their careers by trading futures contracts;
stock option traders often start by trading stock. If a trader has become accustomed to
evaluating his risk in terms of the number of underlying contracts bought or sold (either
futures contracts or shares of stock), he can use the delta to equate the directional risk
of an option position with a position of similar size in the underlying market.

Since an underlying contract always has a delta of 100, each 100 deltas in an option
position represents a theoretical position equivalent to one underlying contract. A trader
who owns an option with a delta of 50 is long, or controls, approximately 4 of an
underlying contract. If he owns ten such contracts, he is long 500 deltas or, in
equivalent terms, five underlying contracts. If the underlying is a futures contract, he is


--- 第 113 页 ---

102 Chapter 6

theoretically long five such contracts. If the underlying is a stock contract consisting of
100 shares of stock, he is theoretically long 500 shares of stock. The trader has a similar
theoretical position if he sells 20 puts with a delta of -25 each, since -20 x -25 = +500.

It is important to emphasize the theoretical aspect of the delta interpretation as an
equivalent to an underlying position. An option is not simply a surrogate for an
underlying position. An actual underlying position is almost exclusively sensitive to
directional moves in the underlying market. An option position, while also sensitive to
directional moves, is also sensitive to other changes in market conditions. An option
trader who looks only at his delta position may be ignoring other risks which could have
a far greater impact on his option position. He must realize that the delta represents an
equivalent underlying position only under very narrowly defined market conditions.

The reader may have already noted that our three interpretations of delta—the
hedge ratio, the rate of change in the theoretical value, and the equivalent underlying
position—are all essentially the same. How a trader interprets a delta position depends
primarily on his trading strategy. For example, suppose a trader has a delta position of
+500. If the trader intends to maintain a delta neutral position, he must sell five
underlying contracts (the hedge ratio interpretation). However, if he believes the market
will rise and wants to maintain his delta position, he knows that in theory he is long five
underlying contracts (the equivalent underlying position interpretation). And finally, if
he does maintain his delta position of +500, the value of his position will change at five
times the rate, or 500%, of the underlying market (the rate of change interpretation).
Even though a trader may interpret the delta differently at different times, each
interpretation is mathematically the same.

There is one other interpretation of the delta which is perhaps of less practical use
but may still be worth mentioning. If we ignore the sign of the delta (positive for calls,
negative for puts), the delta is approximately equal to the probability that the option will
finish in-the-money. A call with a delta of 25, or a put with a delta of -25, has
approximately a 25% chance of finishing in-the-money. A call with a delta of 75, ora
put with a delta of -75, has approximately a 75% chance of finishing in-the- money. As
an option’s delta moves closer to 100, or—100 for puts, the option becomes more and
more likely to finish in-the-money. As the delta moves closer to zero, the option becomes
less and less likely to finish in-the-money. We can also see why at-the- money options
have deltas close to 50. If we assume that price changes are random, there is half a
chance that the market will rise (the option goes into-the-money), and half a chance that
the market will fall (the option goes out-of-the money}.

Of course, the delta is only an approximation of the probability since interest rate
considerations and, in the case of stock options, dividends, may distort this interpreta-
tion. Moreover, most option strategies depend not only on whether an option finishes
in-the-money, but by how much. Ifa trader sells an option with a delta of 10 in the belief
that the option will expire worthless nine times out of ten, he may indeed be correct.
But if on the tenth time he loses an amount greater than the total premium he took in
the nine times the option expired worthless, the trade will result in a negative expected
return. In option trading the primary consideration is not always how often a strategy


--- 第 114 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 103

wins or loses, but also how much it wins or loses. Every experienced trader is willing
to accept several small losses if he can occasionally offset these with one big win.

THE GAMMA

In discussing the delta, we noted that under some circumstances, when the option is
far out-of the-money, its delta is close to zero. At other times, when the option is deeply
in-the-money, its delta is close to 100 (-100 for puts}. We can logically conclude that
as the underlying price changes, the delta of an option must also be changing, As the
underlying price rises, call deltas move towards 100 and put deltas move towards zero;
as the underlying price falls, call deltas move towards zero and put deltas move towards
—100. This effect is shown in Figures 6-6 and 6-7.

The gamma (I), sometimes referred to as the curvature of an option, is the rate at
which an option’s delta changes as the price of the underlying changes. The gamma is
usually expressed in deltas gained or lost per one point change in the underlying, with
the delta increasing by the amount of the gamma when the underlying rises, and falling
by the amount of the gamma when the underlying falls. If an option has a gamma of 5,2
for each point rise (fall} in the price of the underlying, the option will gain (lose) 5 deltas.
If the option originally had a delta of 25, and the underlying moves up (down) one full
point, then the new delta of the option will be 30 (20). If the underlying moves up
(down) another point, the new delta will be 35 (15).

Note that Figures 6-6 and 6-7 seem to be identical, even though the former
represents call gammas and the latter put gammas. This can only mean that both calls
and puts with the same exercise price and the same amount of time to expiration have
the same curvature.? This may at first seem odd, but it becomes logical when we
remember that zero is greater than —S0 in the same way that —50 is greater than -100.
Negative numbers become more positive (or less negative) as one moves towards zero.
Therefore, both calls and puts must have positive gammas. This often confuses the new
trader since, through his use of the delta, he is accustomed to associating positive
numbers with calls and negative numbers with puts. But regardless of whether we are
working with calls or puts, we always add the gamma to the old delta as the underlying
rises, and subtract the gamma from the old delta as the underlying falls. When a trader
is long options, whether calls or puts, he has a long gamma position. When he is short
Options, he has a short gamma position.

For example, suppose an at-the-money call, with a delta of 50, and an at-the money
put, with a delta of 50, both have gammaas of 5. If the underlying contract rises one
point, we add the gamma of 5 to the call delta of 50, to get the new delta of 55. To get
the new put delta if the underlying contract rises one point we also add the gamma of
5 to the put delta of -50 to get the new delta of —45. This corresponds to our intuition

2. When the delta is expressed in the decimal format (0 to 1.00), the gamma ts expressed in the same
format.

3. If interest rates are zero, as they are assumed to be in Figures 6-6 and 6-7, the gamma of calls and puts

with the same exercise price will be identical. If interest rates are not zero, and there is a possibility of
early exercise, the gammas may differ slightly.


--- 第 115 页 ---

104

Figure 6-6: Call Delta vs. Underlying Price
100

Chapter 6

go{ Time = 60 days
Volatility = 20%

80-
70+
6 90

50-

Delta

100
40- . ;

. a o : a

80 85 90 x m7
Underlying Price

Figure 6-7: Put Delta vs. Underlying Price

110

0

Time = 60 days

-10-
Volatility = 20%

-207
-30-
0 90

-50-

Delta

100."

ve ] a “ ; a
-80-

-90+ ue -

. é 10," |

80

I T
% 100 105
Underlying Price

110


--- 第 116 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 105

that as the underlying price rises, at-the-money calls move into-the-money and at-the-
money puts move out-of-the- money. If the underlying contract falls one full point, in
both cases we subtract the gamma, giving the call a delta of 45 (50-5), and the put a
delta of -$5 (-50-5). Now the call is moving out-of-the-money and the put is moving
into-the-money.

We know that an underlying contract has a delta of 100. But what is the gamma
associated with an underlying contract? Since the gamma is the rate of change in the
delta, and the delta of an underlying contract is always 100, the gamma must be zero.

The gamma is a measure of how fast an option changes its directional charac-
teristics, acting more or less like an actual underlying position. Since directional risk is
always important, the gamma is an important risk measurement. Indeed, an option
position can change its directional risk dramatically, even if a trader takes no action in
the marketplace. A large gamma number, whether positive or negative, indicates a high
degree of risk; a low gamma number indicates a low degree of risk. Every option trader
learns to look carefully not only at current directional risk (the delta), but also at how
that directional risk will change if the underlying market begins to move (the gamma).

Consider a trader who sells ten calls with a delta of 30 each. He is short 300 deltas
(-10 x 30), equivalent in theory to being short three underlying contracts. If this trader
is accustomed to dealing in lots of five underlying contracts or less, he is, for the
moment, within his normal risk limits. If the market rises ten points and he considers
only his original delta position of -300, he may assume that he is still, in theory, short
the same three underlying contracts. But what if the initial gamma of each call was 6?
Then, for each point rise in the underlying contract, each call will gain 6 deltas. When
the underlying rises ten points, each call will gain 60 deltas, for a total delta of 90 each.
The trader’s directional risk has now increased by a factor of three. Instead of the initial
delta of -300, the delta position is now -900, well beyond his normal risk limits,

A large gamma can sometimes overwhelm the inexperienced trader. New traders
are well advised to avoid large gamma positions, particularly negative ones, because of
the speed with which such positions can change. Even experienced traders occasionally
take on gamma positions which are too risky. This was dramatically demonstrated in
the collapse of the Volume Investors clearing firm on the COMEX in the spring of 1985.
Several traders, all clearing their trades through the same firm, built up extremely large
negative gamma positions by selling large numbers of out-of-the-money gold options. In
the past this had been a very profitable strategy, since the gold market had been
relatively quiet with low volatility. But on this occasion the market made a violent
upward move, leaving the traders, who had originally been delta neutral, short thou-
sands of deltas in a rapidly rising market. The losses sustained by the traders not only
led to the collapse of the clearing firm, but also to a crisis in the COMEX’s clearing
association. The incident might have been avoided had someone, either the traders
themselves, the clearing firm, or the clearing association, realized that the large negative
gamma position represented an unacceptable risk. Most firms which trade options or
clear option trades for their customers now have risk managers responsible for identify-
ing such dangerous positions.


--- 第 117 页 ---

106 Chapter 6

The gamma can also help a trader maintain a delta neutral position by enabling him
to make a quick estimate of how the delta is changing. Suppose a trader has a delta
position of +500 prior to the opening of the market. If he wishes to be delta neutral he
knows that he will have to sell 500 deltas on the opening. He can accomplish this by
selling five underlying contracts. But suppose that his gamma position is +100 and the
market is expected to open two points higher. If it does in fact open two points higher
his delta position will no longer be +500, but +700 since he will become 100 deltas
longer for each point rise in the underlying. He now knows that in order to be delta
netitral he must sell 700 deltas, or seven underlying contracts. He can make this
calculation without any computer assistance simply by knowing his initial delta and
gamma positions.

Since the delta of an option must always remain in the range of zero to 100 (zero
to ~100 for puts), we can logically conclude that the gamma must also be changing.
Otherwise, continuously adding or subtracting a constant gamma would take the delta
beyond this range. The effect of changes in market conditions on the value of gammas
is shown in Figures 6-8, 6-9, and 6-10. Figure 6-8 demonstrates that the gamma is
greatest for an option which is at-the-money, and becomes progressively smaller as an
option moves either into- or out-of-the-money. Figures 6-9 and 6-10 show that the
gamma of an at-the-money option can increase dramatically as expiration approaches,
or as we decrease our volatility assumption. A trader’s gamma position, which may have
initially been small, can become increasingly large through the passage of time or
through changes in volatility. An option position must always be monitored to ensure
that its risk characteristics remain within acceptable limits.

While the gamma is perhaps the most common measure of the change in the delta,
the delta is also subject to change from market conditions other than movement in the
price of the underlying contract. Figures 6-11 and 6-12 show how call and put deltas
change as time passes. Figures 6-13 and 6-14 show how deltas change with changes in
volatility. Note that all four sets of graphs have the same shape. As we increase the time
to expiration or increase volatility, all options tend to become more at-the-money, with
call deltas approaching 50 and put deltas approaching -50. Conversely, as we decrease
the amount of time to expiration or decrease volatility, all option deltas move away from
50 (-50 for puts}. An option which is in-the-money will move further into-the-money,
and an option which is out-of-the-money will move further out-of-the-money. Options
which are at-the-money and have deltas close to 50 tend to maintain the same delta
characteristics regardless of changes in time or volatility.

Perhaps a commentis in order here about what atthe-money means. Traders tend
to think of an at-the-money option as one whose exercise price is approximately equal
to the current price of the underlying contract. By this definition a trader will instinc-
tively assign a delta of 50 to any option whose exercise price is currently at-the-money.
However, a theoretical pricing model will interpret the at-the-money option (the one
with a delta of 50) as the option whose current exercise price is most likely to be closest
to the price of the underlying contract at expiration. Suppose that interest rates are 12%
annually and that a certain stock is currently trading at $100. If two five-month calls are
available with exercise prices of 100 and 105, which call has a delta closer to 50? We


--- 第 118 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 107

Figure 6-8: Call or Put Gamma vs. Underlying Price
6

90 Time = 60 days
~ Volatility = 20%
100

110

Gamma
w
L

= T T T T 7
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120
Underlying Price

Figure 6-9: Call or Put Gamma vs. Time to Expiration
257-

Underlying Price = 100
Volatility = 20%

154

Gamma

to) 1

LL
—_ 90

0 ee T T T T
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

Time to Expiration (days)



--- 第 119 页 ---

108 Chapter 6

Figure 6-10: Calf or Put Gamma vs. Volatility

25
Underlying Price = 100
Time = 60 days
207
154
iy
— .
& “100
104
54
110 eto - = Lie
— 90
(0) : nnn 1 1 T T T
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40

Volatility (%)

Figure 6-11: Call Delta vs. Time to Expiration
100

907 90
807 |
Underlying Price = 100
70- Volatility = 20%

60-

Delta

40-
307

A cee ee

= —~T T tT T TT
(0) 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

Time to Expiration (days)


--- 第 120 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions

Figure 6-12: Put Delta vs. Time to Expiration

Delta

109

0

-104

-204

-307

-404

—

Underlying Price =100
Volatility = 20%

ae

-607
-707
-804

-90-

-100
0

Tt T T T T T

20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Time to Expiration (days)

Figure 6-13: Call Delta vs. Volatility

Delta

200

100

90+

80+

705

407
307
20

105

90

Underlying Price = 100
Time = 60 days

Volatility (%)

40


--- 第 121 页 ---

110 Chapter 6

Figure 6-14: Put Delta vs. Volatility
0

-10- 90

“20; Underlying Price = 100

Time = 60 days

~30-

-40-
100 snepeneseeeeceeerrtenteceee atin

~507 .

Delta

-604

-80+

-100 po
0 5 10 15 2 2 30 35 40

Volatility (%)

saw in Chapter 4 that the mean of the distribution assumed in most theoretical pricing
models is the forward price (the break-even price) for the underlying contract. In our
present case, the forward price is the current stock price of $100 plus the $5 carrying
costs over the five-month holding period. The 105 call is therefore the one which the
model interprets as being at-the-money, and hence will have a delta of SO. Depending
on the type of underlying contract, under extreme interest rate conditions or with a
great deal of time remaining to expiration, options can have deltas decidedly different
from what we might instinctively surmise.

Just as a delta neutral option position can become unbalanced through movement
in the underlying contract, it can also become unbalanced through the passage of time
or through changes in volatility. No trader knows for certain whether he is delta neutral
because he can’t be certain about the accuracy of the inputs into the theoretical pricing
model. The delta value depends, among other factors, on the volatility assumption. And
volatility is just that, an assumption. A trader who sells four calls, each with a delta of
25, and buys one underlying contract, might believe that he is delta neutral. But in order
to arrive at a call delta of 25 the trader is required to feed some volatility into a
theoretical pricing model. If he subsequently decides that his original volatility assump-
tion was too low, and he now raises it, we can see in Figure 6-13 that the call delta will
rise towards 50. Using his new volatility assumption the delta of the call might be 35,
and instead of being delta neutral, the trader is now 40 deltas short. All he did to
unbalance his delta position was to change his assumptions about market conditions.


--- 第 122 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 111

Nothing in the foregoing discussion invalidates the concept of delta neutrality,
which is still an important one. However, a trader must realize that a delta neutral
position depends on an estimate of market conditions, both current and future, and
there is no guarantee that this estimate will be correct. As he changes his assumptions
about market conditions, he must constantly change his trading strategies to fit these
new assumptions. Delta neutral trading is only one aspect of this principle.

THE THETA

The effect of a change in time to expiration on the theoretical values of calls and puts is
shown in Figures 6-15 and 6-16. Note that all options, both calls and puts, lose value as
expiration approaches. The theta(O), or time decay factor, is the rate at which an option
loses value as time passes. It is usually expressed in points lost per day, when all other
conditions remain the same. An option with a theta of .05 will lose .05 in value for each
day that passes with no change in other market conditions. If the option is worth 2.75
today, then tomorrow it will be worth 2.70. The day after that, it will be worth 2.65.

Time runs in only one direction and, technically, the theta is a positive number.
However, as a convenient notation, and to remind the user that the theta represents a
loss in the option’s value as time passes, it is sometimes written as a negative number.
This is the convention which will be followed in this text. Therefore, the theta of an
option which loses .05 per day will be written as -.05. Consequently, a long option
position will always have a negative theta, and a short option position will always have
a positive theta. Note that this is just the opposite of the gamma, where a long option
position has a positive gamma, and a short option position has a negative gamma.

As a general principle, an option position will have a gamma and theta of opposite
signs. Moreover, the relative size of the gamma and theta will correlate. A large positive
gamma goes hand in hand with a large negative theta, while a large negative gamma
goes hand in hand with a large positive theta. We saw that as expiration approaches,
the gamma of an at-the-money option becomes increasingly large. The same is also true
of the theta. As we get closer to expiration the rate at which an option decays begins to
accelerate. If the option is exactly at-the-money, its theta at the moment of expiration
becomes infinitely large.

Every option position is a tradeoff between market movement and time decay. If
price movement in the underlying contract will help a trader (positive gamma), the
passage of time will hurt (negative theta). And vice versa. The trader can’t have it both
ways. Either he wants the market to move, or he wants it to sit still. This opposing effect
can be seen in Figure 6-9 (gamma vs. time to expiration) and Figure 6-17 (theta vs. time
to expiration). As the gamma becomes large, so does the theta. Just as a large negative
gamma represents a high degree of risk with respect to market movement, a large
negative theta represents a high degree of risk with respect to the passage of time.

Is it ever possible for an option to have a positive theta such that if nothing changes
the option will be worth more tomorrow than it is today? When futures options are
subject to stock-type settlement, as they currently are in the United States, the carrying
cost on a deeply in-the-money option, either a call or a put, can, under some circum-


--- 第 123 页 ---

112 Chapter 6
Figure 6-15: Call Theoretical Value vs. Time to Expiration
12
90
10-
$s 8) Underlying Price = 100
sg Volatility = 20%
i ee
Be _—
3 100
Roo ce —
F 4 _ -
27 a "1 O.. Ca
o+ i = - T T T T T T 7
ie) 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Time to Expiration (days)
Figure 6-16: Put Theoretical Value vs. Time to Expiration
14
VO
100 Lee
tole eee ue
a
3
Gy
= 8 Underlying Price = 100
§ Volatility = 20%
Bo
& 100 ee
47 ae
—
0 : T ~ + T T T
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

Time to Expiration (days)

Ss


--- 第 124 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 113

Figure 6-17: Call or Put Theta vs. Time to Expiration

0.25
Underlying Price = 100
Volatility = 20%
0.207
0.155
s '
o
pas
F :
0.1075 :
, 100
0.08- MN
110, _— = orton |
0.00-1 = = T T T T T T T T 1
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

Time to Expiration (days)

stances, be greater than the volatility component. If this happens, and the option is
European (no early exercise permitted), it will have a theoretical value less than parity
(less than intrinsic value). As expiration approaches, the value of the option will slowly
rise to parity. Hence, the option will have a positive theta. A put option on stock can be
similarly affected if the put is deeply in-the-money and, again, no early exercise is
permitted. If interest rates are high enough, the put may be worth less than parity, and
So wiil rise to parity as expiration approaches. In both cases, however, the option must
be European. American options, where early exercise is a possibility, can never be worth
less than parity, and so can never have positive thetas.4 Since the conditions under
which a European option will have a positive theta are rare, in general we can assume
that an option will lose value as time passes.

THE VEGA OR KAPPA

Just as we are concerned with the effect on an option’s theoretical value by movement
in the underlying contract (delta) and the passage of time (theta), we must also be

4. One can argue that a put on a stock which {s about to pay a large dividend will also have a positive
theta. When the stock gives up the dividend, it will drop by approximately the amount of the dividend,
and this drop in price will increase the value of the put. The reader can make his own decision as to
whether this reflects a positive theta, or is actually the result of some change in market conditions (the
stock going ex-dividend).


--- 第 125 页 ---

114 Chapter 6

concerned with a change in volatility. This effect is shown in Figures 6-18 and 6-19,
While the terms delta, gamma, and theta are found in most option texts, there is no
generally accepted term for the sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a change
in volatility. The most commonly used term in the trading community is vega, and this
is the term which will be used in this book. But this is by no means universal. Since
vega is not a Greek letter, a common alternative in academic literature, where Greek
letters are preferred, is kappa (K).

The vega of an option is usually given in point change in theoretical value for each
one percentage point change in volatility.5 Since all options gain value with rising
volatility, the vega for both calls and puts is positive. If an option has a vega of .15, for
each percentage point increase (decrease) in volatility, the option will gain (lose) .15 in
theoretical value. If the option has a theoretical value of 3.25 at a volatility of 20%, then
it will have a theoretical value of 3.40 at a volatility of 21%, and a theoretical value of
3.10 at a volatility of 19%.

Note in Figure 6-20 that an at-the-money option always has a greater vega than
either an in-the-money or out-of-the-money option when all options are of the same type
and have the same amount of time to expiration. This means that an at-the-money
option is always the most sensitive in total points to a change in volatility. As a corollary,

Figure 6-18: Call Theoretical Value vs. Volatility
14

90

104

8- Underlying Price = 100
Time = 60 days

Theoretical Value

5 10. 15 20 25 30 35 40
Volatility (%)

S. The theta and the vega are sometimes expressed in dollar (or other appropriate currency) change in the
option’s value as time passes or volatility changes,


--- 第 126 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 115

Figure 6-19: Put Theoretical Value vs. Volatility

14
90 _.. _.
tol ~ —- |
o
2
GI
> 8-
§ Underlying Price = 100
Bay Time = 60 days
oe
oe y
Be
[a
| 100.
an
pe ce :
a ! T T T T
(e]

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Volatility (%)

the out-of the-money option is always the most sensitive in percent terms to a change
in volatility. For example, suppose that with a volatility assumption of 15% an at-the
money and an out-ofthemoney option have theoretical values of 2.00 and .50,
respectively. If we raise our volatility assumption to 20%, the options might now have
theoretical values of 3.00 and 1.00. The at-the-money option has shown the greater total
point increase (1.00 vs. 50), while the out-of-the-money option has shown the greater
percent increase (50% vs. 100%). Since many option strategies involve buying and
selling unequal numbers of options, the latter characteristic wil! be important when we
look at trading strategies. (The reader can confirm this by looking again at Figure 4-11.)

Note also in Figure 6-20 that the vega of all options declines as expiration
approaches. Therefore, a long-term option will always be more sensitive to a change in
volatility than a short-term option with otherwise identical contract specifications. A
four-month option will have a greater vega, and therefore be more sensitive to a change
in volatility, than a one-month option.

This last point illustrates an important principle of option evaluation, that time and
volatility are closely interconnected. More time to expiration means more time for
volatility to take effect, while less time to expiration may mean that any change in
volatility will have only a minor effect on an option’s value. Moreover, changes in the
amount of time remaining to expiration and changes in volatility often have similar
effects on an option’s value. Decreasing volatility is similar to decreasing time to
expiration. Ifa trader cannot remember what effect the passage of time will have on his


--- 第 127 页 ---

116 Chapter 6

Figure 6-20: Call or Put Vega vs. Time to Expiration
0.305

Underlying Price = 100
0.257 Volatility = 20%

100.
0.207 a

0.15) Pa

Vega

0.107

0.054 °

0.00+1 — T T T T T T T T
QO 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

Time to Expiration (days)

position, he might consider instead what effect a reduction in volatility will have. This
can be seen by comparing Figures 6-15 and 6-18 (theoretical values with respect to
changes in time and volatility), Figures 6-11 and 6-13 (delta values with respect to
changes in time and volatility), and Figures 6-9 and 6-10 (gamma values with respect
to changes in time and volatility). In each case the similar shapes of the graphs indicate
similar effects of time and volatility.

Finally, we can see in Figure 6-21 that the vega of an at-the-money option is
relatively constant, regardless of changes in volatility. This makes it easy to estimate the
theoretical value of an at-the-money option under a wide variety of volatility scenarios.

THE RHO

The sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a change in interest rates is given by
its rho (P). Unlike the other sensitivities, one cannot generalize about the rho since its
characteristics depend on the type of underlying instrument and the settlement proce-
dure for the options. The general effects have already been summarized in Figure 6-2.
Note that foreign currency options which require the delivery of the currency, rather
than the delivery of a futures contract, are affected by both domestic and foreign interest
rates. Hence, such options have two interest rate sensitivities, rho, (the domestic
interest rate sensitivity) and rho, (the foreign interest rate sensitivity]. The latter is
sometimes denoted with the Greek letter phi (®).


--- 第 128 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 117

Figure 6-21: Call or Put Vega vs. Volatility
0.18

100

0.147 ce ae]
Underlying Price = 100 wos 7”
0.127 Time = 60 days .

0.10+

Vega

0.08-

0.06-

0.04-

0.025

T T T

0,00+
0 25 30 35 40

Volatility (%)

Tf both the underlying contract and options are subject to futures-type settlement,
the rho must be zero, since no cash flow results from either a trade in the underlying
contract or a trade in the options. When options on futures are subject to stock-type
settlement, the rho associated with both calls and puts is negative. An increase in
interest rates will decrease the value of such options since it raises the cost of carrying
the options. In the case of stock options, calls will have positive rhos (an increase in
interest rates will make calls a more desirable alternative to buying the stock) and puts
will have negative rhos (an increase in interest rates will make puts a less desirable
alternative to selling the stock).

Although changes in interest rates can affect an option’s theoretical value, the
interest rate is usually the least important of the inputs into a pricing model. For this
reason the rho usually takes a back seat to the other, more critical, sensitivities: the delta,
gamma, theta, and vega. Indeed, few traders pay much attention to the rho. However,
for completeness, some of the characteristics of the rho are shown in Figures 6-22 (stock
options) and 6-23 (futures options). In all cases the options which have the highest rho
are those which are deeply in-the-money, because they require the greatest cash outlay.
And the greater the amount of time to expiration, the greater the rho. Note also that
because an option is a substitute for a position in the underlying instrument, the rho for
stock options is much greater in magnitude than the rho for futures options. The
purchase or sale of stock results in a much greater cash flow than the purchase or sale
ofa futures contract. (The vertical scale in Figure 6-23 is approximately ten times greater


--- 第 129 页 ---

118 Chapter 6

Figure 6-22: Futures Option Rho vs. Underlying Price

-0.017
-0.025

+0.0341 7"

-0.04+ ra “call (150 days)

Rho

0.05) Putttso days)”

7

-0.06+ oA

Fa

Exercise Price = 100 wa
; Volatility = 20% .
0.07) Interest Rate = 8.00% ‘
ia

-0.08+"

-0.09 T T T T T
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120

Underlying Price

than the vertical scale in Figure 6-22.) Because of its relatively minor importance, we
will generally disregard the rho in analyzing option strategies and managing risk.

SUMMARY

It is important for the active option trader to become familiar with delta, gamma, theta,
and vega characteristics, since he may need to make quick decisions about trading
strategies and risk management, decisions which might well determine his financial
fate. The following is a summary of these characteristics:

Delta—Deltas range from zero for far outof-the-money calls to 100 for
deeply in-the-money calls, and from zero for far out-of-the-money puts to
-100 for deeply in-the-money puts.

At-the-money calls have deltas of approximately 50, and at-the-money
puts approximately —50.

As time passes, or as we decrease our volatility assumption, call deltas move
away from 50, and puts deltas away from —SO. As we increase our volatility
assumption, call deltas move towards 50, and put deltas towards -S0.

Gamma—aAt-the-money options have greater gammas than either in- or
out-of-the-money options with otherwise identical contract specifications.


--- 第 130 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions

Figure 6-23: Stock Option Rho vs. Underlying Price

Rho

119

0.4 .
Exercise Price = 100
0.34 Volatility = 20%
Interest Rate = 8.00%

0.25

0.15

0.175

r
-0.25

wen

-0.34 pe

T

80 85 90 9 100 105 110 115
Underlying Price

As we increase our volatility assumption, the gamma of an in- or
out-of-the-money option rises, while the gamma of an at-the-money option
falls. As we decrease our volatility assumption, or as time to expiration
grows shorter, the gamma of an in- or out-of-the money option fails, while
the gamma of an at-the-money option rises, sometimes dramatically.

Theta—At-the-money options have greater thetas than either in- or out-of
the-money options with otherwise identical contract specifications.

The theta of an at-the-money option increases as expiration approaches.
A short-term, at-the-money option will always decay more quickly than a
long-term, at-the-money option.

As we increase (decrease) our volatility assumption, the theta of an
option will rise (fall). Higher volatility means there is greater time value
associated with the option, so that each day’s decay will also be greater
when no movement occurs.

Vega—aAt-the-money options have greater vegas than either in- or out-of:
the-money options with otherwise identical contract specifications.

Out-of-the-money options have the greatest vega as a percent of theoreti-
cal value.


--- 第 131 页 ---

120 Chapter 6

The vegas of all options decrease as time to expiration grows shorter. A
long-term option is always more sensitive to a change in volatility than a
short-term option with otherwise identical contract specifications.

The vega of an at-the-money option is relatively constant with respect to
changes in volatility. If we raise or lower volatility, the option’s vega is
unlikely to change significantly.

In Figure 6-3 we summarized the general effects on stock option values if the
expected dividend payment for the underlying stock changes. But we did not address
the question of magnitude. How sensitive is an option’s value to a change in dividends?
When a stock goes ex-dividend, its price will normally drop by approximately the
amount of the dividend. Increasing the dividend is therefore similar to dropping the
stock price, and cutting the dividend is similar to increasing the stock price. If a stock
had been expected to pay a dividend of $.75 per share, and the dividend is increased to
$1.00 per share, this is similar to dropping the stock price by an additional $.25. Since
an option’s sensitivity to a change in the price of the underlying is given by the delta,
the sensitivity to a change in the dividend can also be approximated by the delta. If the
dividend is increased by $.25, a call with a delta of 60 will lose about $.15 in value. A
put with a delta of —40 will gain about $.10. This approximation applies only when one
dividend payment is expected prior to expiration. If multiple dividend payments are
expected over the life of the option, the effect on the option’s value must be increased
accordingly. As we will see, dividend considerations play their greatest role in arbitrage
Strategies and early exercise.

Two typical evaluation tables with prices, implied volatilities, and all relevant
sensitivities are shown in Figures 6-24 and 6-25, Figure 6-24 is for options on September
Deutschemark futures on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as of 22 May 1992. The
values are based on a volatility assumption of 10.5% and an interest rate assumption of
4.50%. Figure 6-25 is for options on General Electric stock on the Chicago Board
Options Exchange as of the same date. The values are based on a volatility assumption
of 22% and an interest rate assumption of 4.50% for all three expiration months (June,
September, December).o The expected dividends for General Electric stock, and their
payment dates, are also included in the assumptions.”

We noted previously that the delta, gamma, theta, and vega can be sensitive to
changes in volatility. Under some circumstances it may be useful for a trader to ask: if
the implied volatility of an option were the correct volatility, what would be its delta,
gamma, theta, and vega? The resulting numbers are referred to as the implied delta,
gamma, theta, and vega. The implied delta and theta, in particular, often appear on
computer printouts, the former because many traders prefer to maintain delta neutral

6. — This is a simplified example with uniform volatility and interest rates. Under some circumstances it
might be more reasonable to vary the volatility and interest rate assumptions for different expiration
dates,

7. Due to the greater likelihood of early exercise for stock options, and the fact that the quoted options
are American, the calculations in Figure 6-25 were done using a binomial model, which more
accurately evaluates the early exercise value of American options. The problem of early exercise will
be discussed further in Chapter 12.


--- 第 132 页 ---

12]

Iption Values and Changing Market Conditions

‘Aued 0} premdn pejsnipe ueeq sey senjea sey) ‘Ueedoing
ue Joyjes suondo uboeuy joR} ul ore Aey} eoulS “Ajued UeY} sse] ONJEA jedesoOoU] & eALY Pinom suORdO esey) Jopow yORIg Peysnipeun ue Huish ,

— 0 0 ) L6~ 62 6'Lt 8io° 6000 ot z £0" 90° 89
— oO () 0) S6~ 629 Zhe 6z0’ SloO- Ss 9S v 90° 80" £9
ell pro’ gtoo- ob z6~ ees leg oll bo’ zZz00~- OF Z He er 99
Olt p90" sZe00- ZS Le~- ery orb sol p90 zeoo- = L'S ral 6r iw s9
sol $80" 6E00- 92 1e~ £g°e 09's LO- sso 2roo- OL Bt ee" ve "9
sok Sok osoo- 6 el~- 6L2 zee s'Ol sol zs00- 36 92 69" 9° 69
ZOk beh gS00- SOLS eg 60% be 9°01 k2b eS00- OF 9E 28" 68" z
yok 82k e2900- gil  z@g~ ost 6’ t v'oL ect s900- Sth Lp beh og't 19
SO Seb 1900- Shh Oe ZOk Zot s0k set 0900 = atk 6g alt aL 09
pok  thkk ssoo- OOL  6e- so ro SO bLE) = §S00- = O'OF OL ree ze'z 6S
901 060° Spoo- 18 o2- 6c" or" 9°01 060° «= broO- =Ssdt'8 6L LOS Loe 8s
ZOl 990° ss00- 09 Zi- az ee LOL 990° sz00- 0'9 28 eee 68's 4S
BOL po e00- OP Vid He st 60 bro 9100- OF 26 LLY SLy 96
zit ogo" eloo- Zz a so’ 20° —_ 0 fe) v2 $6 «ALS _ ss
9lL lo Zo0O- EL a zo’ +0" _— 0 ) om £6 «1Z'9 _— eS
sll 600° E000- 9° I 10" zo" — 0 ) 9 86 abl — €g
Vel p00" 0 z 0 0 10° — 0 ) z 66 «bZ'8 _ 2g

Aypejon eBep eyoyy, ewWeD eYEq anlea aoud = AyineoA efieA ejey, ewUey e}eq enleA = 89d = BO
peiduy leonjesooyL pelduy feojesooyL @8|940XA
sind s11vo
WOT y= eye See}u] HO. =AMeIOA ‘skep Go} = uoyelidxe oj} oul, = 4.209 = SBWIOYOSINEd E66} Jequialdes
(lapoyy oeRIg) Ze61 AeW Zz
ve-9 ainbl4



--- 第 133 页 ---

O6h
8'6L
vile
0's

Ldt
S'6t
e6l
9'22
o'8l
o'el
6'be
SPE

Aynejon eBeA eyoy_, ewUWeXDy e}/0q

peyiduy

2Zv
6a"
ble
6Zb

160°
2st"
69h
ple

600°
950°
620°
€20'
400°
0

£00°
00"
900°
900°

£00
610°
tho
800°

Q
PLO
920°
800°
Q
ie)

ee
sé
ee
ga

ge
Ly
Gp
oe

o%
9
Lez
gE
b
0

bl
8S
tp
ge

se
v9
OP
6b

66
a)
2€
9
0
i)

26'6
bro
ole
os"

ve'6
S'S
el]
bO'L

p88
Oo'b
60°F
oly
9

0
anea
jeonejoayL

eG

Sg
id

XA

6
AG
14%
vAL

eB
Mp
aL
4
¥,
gL A

3oHd

S'6t o6l"
z0z Lee’
62 gle
bbe bZb
06h cord
261 991°
Z0z gol
yee CA
Lie ho
eel 030°
o'6t £20°
e82 600°
_ 1)

_— 1)
Aeon eBan
payduyy

E10"
glo’
8l0°
240°

blo
Lt"
610°
240°

S00’
€zO"
260°
Zto
800°
900°

eyouL BwWey e190

SLAd

a?
vE
ve
Le

ee
ov
op
Ve

ve
e9
GL
ve
‘
Q

82
ey
2)
dd

4
OP
2
28

€
02
29
86
oo}
00}

sTIvo

98"t
eee
8's
298

sha
8E'y
gLz

0"

Ly

sve

2L9

Ofte

69°91
anleA

JeopesoouL

%E
9
%g

%,

VAS
Sey
AB

oly,
%
RS
9
v%ebh
%AQL

89d

98 9eq
08 98q
g29eq
02990

ge des
0g dag
g.dag
OL deg

se unr
og unr
sz unr
ozZ unr
gg unr
og unr

e9"ld
8S[U0XF

Z6 Jequisoed € UO Sq’ ‘Z6 Jequieldes Zz UO Gs" 'Z6 EUS € UO Gg" = puSpPINg

!%0S' p = O81 SOO}U] {%S'O7 = AUINBIOA ‘UYequieseq) skep O1zZ ‘(Wequieydes) skep 614 ‘(eunr) sep gz uOteltdxe Oo} eull) 8697 = OUJOa/q [eIBUH

122

(POY uls}suaqny-ssoY-XOD) 266} ABW 2
Sz-9 ainBi4


--- 第 134 页 ---

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions 123

positions using the implied delta, and the latter because the rate at which the price of
an option decays is usually more useful than the rate at which the theoretical value
decays.

Paowing the total delta, gamma, theta, and vega of an option position can help a
trader determine beforehand how the position is likely to react to changing market
conditions. Since all these numbers are additive, the total sensitivity of a position can
pe calculated by adding up the sensitivities of the individual options. For example, a
trader who has purchased five options with a gamma of 2.5 each, and sold two options
with a gamma of 4.0 each, has a total gamma position of

(+5 x 2.5) + (-2 x 4.0) = +4.5

Similarly, if he has purchased nine options with a theta of -.05 each, and sold four
options with a theta of -.08 each, his total theta position is

(+9 x -.05) + (-4 x ~.08) = -.13

New traders sometimes find it difficult to remember whether a delta, gamma, theta,
or vega position is long or short. The various positions and their respective signs are
given in Figure 6-26. The sign of the delta, gamma, theta, or vega, together with the
magnitude of the numbers, tell the trader which changes in market conditions will
either help or hurt his position, and to what degree. The positive or negative effect of
changing market conditions is summarized in Figure 6-27.

Even though a trader can analyze the effect of changing market conditions on his
position through its delta, gamma, theta, and vega characteristics, his first and primary
concern is that the position be profitable if his assumptions about market conditions are
correct. This means that the position ought to have a positive theoretical edge. The
theoretical edge can be calculated in the same way as the total delta, gamma, theta, and
vega. One need only multiply the theoretical edge of each individual option (the
difference between its trade or settlement price and theoretical value) by the number of
contracts traded, and add up all the contracts involved. The amount of positive or
negative theoretical edge is a reflection of the position’s potential profit or loss.

The top portion of Figure 6-28 shows a theoretical evaluation table for individual
options on a hypothetical futures contract. Beneath the table are several possible option
positions for which the total theoretical edge, delta, gamma, theta, and vega have been
calculated. The reader should take a moment to look at the arithmetic of each position,
and to consider the risk characteristics associated with each position. Are all the
Positions likely to be profitable if the assumptions used for theoretical evaluation are
correct? What will help or hurt each position?

There is one other option sensitivity that is not generally used by traders, but which
the reader may encounter in other option texts. An option’s elasticity, sometimes
denoted with the Greek letter omega (Q) (or less commonly the Greek letter lambda
(A}), is the relative percent change in an option’s value for a given percent change in the
price of the underlying contract. For example, suppose a call has a theoretical value of
2.50 with the underlying contract at 50. If the call has a delta of 25, and the underlying
contract rises one point to 51, the call should rise to 2.75. In percent terms the call has


--- 第 135 页 ---

124 Chapter 6

Figure 6-26
Your delta Your gamma Your theta Your vega
(hedge ratio) (curvature) (time decay) (volatility)

If you are... positionIs... positionis... positionis... positionis...
long the underlying positive (e) (9) (e)
short the underlying negative is) (0) oO
long calls positive positive negative positive
short calls negative hegative positive negative
long puts negative positive negative positive
short puts positive negative positive negative
Figure 6-27
{f your delta position is... you want the underlying contract to...

positive rise in price

negative fall in price
If your gamma positionis.. . you want the underlying contract to...

positive move very swiftly, regardless of direction

negative move slowly, regardless of direction
If your theta positionis..., the passage of time will generally...

positive increase the value of your position

negative decrease the value of your position
If your vega position is... you want volatility to...

positive rise

negative fall
If your rho position is... you want interest rates to...

positive rise

negative fall

changed its value five times as fast as the underlying: the underlying rose 2% (1/50),
while the call rose 10% (.25/2.50). We say that the call has an elasticity of 5. The
elasticity is sometimes referred to as the option’s leverage value, The greater an option’s
elasticity, the more highly leveraged the option.

An easy method of calculating an option’s elasticity is to divide the price of the
underlying contract by the option’s theoretical value, and multiply this by the option’s
delta (when calculating the elasticity, we use the decimal format for the delta):

a _ Underlying price
elasticity = theoretical value * delta


--- 第 136 页 ---

125

Option Values and Changing Market Conditions

6L'e+
0
80° x E—
80° x B+
pL x git
Ob XOLt
Ex L
240° xX abt
20°X 2b-

og't+
oT XOr-
gl x Oat
EL XOh-

og'+
80° OL-
PE XO

OL'e-
Ob xXGt-
eb xol-

Sr
£0'- X Gd-
eb xOb+

QOg'e+
0
9b x Oet
uonisog BBa,

80° Zto—-
vl bzo-
ic) 920-
eV zo
20 bLo-
ebon 220UL

QA2A-O
ows nv

o¢@

euWeD bed

oss 2 o6t
oO (e)
ol X & 92x E-
vlO'— x BF 92x Bt
Z20"—* SL+ bp x ott
920— x OL+ By X Olt
QZ0- x LZ- Bex L-
blo'-—x abt OSX Sit
600°— x ZI- O'? x Sl-
ool o'st+
go —* OF TP Ol—
92z0'— x 02+ 6 x 02+
0z0- x Ol- 6x ol-
ogo’— Ost
PiO-— x Ol- oe x Ol—
220'— X O+ hex Olt
ogs'+ Sobhl-
920- x GI- 6rxsl-
020'- x O1- BE xOl-
$90°+ Obl
}hO- x Se- 0? X Se-
-Z0"- x QL + 6'e x OF
oZs"— O'86+
Q 0
9Z0'— x Qa+ 6b x O¢+
uonlsog BeYUL uopIsog ewwer
98-— 9e'Ol PProl
oZ- leg 629
8r- Ble Zee
So- sol rel
6 se" or’
one, 289Md
jeopesoayL

Sind

poz~ pelt
OOTF XSF ~o
98- x §- g0'+ xe
elt x gt go'-x 8
82+ x Gt+ Oxgh
8b-X O+ 20'+ OL
plt x L- BOF x L
6-X Zt bh XL
06+ x ZI- E+ XZ
0 oo'e+
Betx O1- 0™ OF
IS+ x OZ+ 90'+ x OZ
pltx Ol- 80+ x OF
OS b+ os'+
I+xO1— so+xOr
e2t x OL+ Ox Ob
og- sz-
Br x ST ZO-X oT
pltxOl- 80'+ OF
ge- ge'l+
6 xX Ge- HP +x Ge
S2-x OL+ 60- x Ol
oat oz i+
COTF OO ~o
St x Ogt+ 90'+ x 02
uontsod E71°q ebpz jeonosoey
80° rlo- 9% roa os
rae 2e0- Vp 82 ge}
cre 920 6p 1S 6l's
el 020" 6s bl elo
20° 600 o'2 06 2z'ot
eBo, Ry, euwey eyeg anjea
feo es0euL

s11v9o

saunjny Z| Buoy
sind gL} € HoYs
SHED OLL g Buo|
$129 SOL St Buoy
synd OF O} Buoy
sifeo g6 Z Woys
sind 06 2} Buoy
sweo 06 Zi WoYs

slf29 SOL OL Hous
seo 001 02 Buoy
syeo G6 O1 Yous

sif@o OL OL UoUSs
stfe2 GO 01 Buoy

sind 001 SL Woys
SyfeO SB OL WoYs

sind 06 $z Hoys
sind g6 Ot Buo;

saimny O} HoYSs
s1fe9 OOL OZ Huo)

uonisodg
gs OlL
sek SOL
ere ool
92°9 sé
se'ol 06
82d 89Hd
@8]010Xq

92-9 aunbiy


--- 第 137 页 ---

126 Chapter 6

In our example we have:

elasticity = a x 25=5

One final observation for the prospective trader. All the numbers we have discussed
in this chapter, the theoretical value, delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho, are constantly
changing, so that the profitability and risks associated with different strategies are also
changing. The importance of analyzing risk cannot be overemphasized. The great
majority of traders who fail at option trading do so because they fail to fully understand
risk and how to manage it. But there is another type of trader, one who attempts to
analyze every possible risk. When this happens, the trader finds it difficult to make any
trading decisions at all; he is stricken with paralysis through analysis. A trader who is
so concerned with risk that he is afraid to make a trade cannot profit, no matter how
well he understands options. When a trader goes into the marketplace he has chosen to
take on some risk. The delta gamma, theta, and vega enable him to identify risk; they
do not eliminate risk. The intelligent trader uses these numbers to help him decide
beforehand which risks are acceptable and which risks are not.


--- 第 138 页 ---

% 7 %

Introduction
to Spreading

In option markets, as in all markets, there are many ways to trade profitably. One type
of trading strategy, common among floor traders, is scalping. A scalper attempts to buy
at the bid price and sell at the offer price as often as possible, without regard to the
contract’s theoretical value. Although the profit from each trade may be small, ifa trader
can do this enough times each day he can expect to show a reasonable profit. Scalping,
however, requires a highly liquid market, and option markets are rarely sufficiently
liquid to support this type of trading.

A different type of trading strategy involves speculating on the direction in which
the underlying contract will move. If a speculator correctly anticipates the market
direction, and takes an appropriate position, he can also expect to show a profit. But
even when the market moves in the expected direction, taking a directional position in
an option market will not necessarily be profitable. Many different forces beyond
directional considerations can affect an option’s price. If a trader’s sole consideration is
direction, he will usually be better off taking a position in the underlying market. If he
does, and he is right, he is assured of making a profit.

The majority of successful option traders engage in spread trading. Since option
evaluation is based on the laws of probability, and because the laws of probability can
be expected to even out only over long periods of time, option traders must often hold
positions for extended periods. Unfortunately, over short periods of time, while the
trader is waiting for the option price to move towards theoretical value, the trader may
be at risk from a wide variety of changes in market conditions which threaten his
potential profit. Indeed, over short periods of time there is no guarantee that an option
will react in a manner consistent with a theoretical pricing model. Spreading is simply
a way of enabling an option trader to take advantage of theoretically mispriced options,
while at the same time reducing the effects of short-term changes in market conditions
so that he can safely hold an option position to maturity.

WHAT IS A SPREAD?

A spread is a strategy which involves taking simultaneous but opposing positions in
different instruments. A spread trader makes the assumption that there is an identifiable
price relationship between different instruments and, although he may not know in

127


--- 第 139 页 ---

128 Chapter 7

which direction the market will move, the price relationship between the instruments
ought to remain relatively constant. When the relationship appears to be temporarily
mispriced, the spread trader will take a long position in the instrument which appears
to be underpriced and a short position in the instrument which appears to be overpriced,
The trader hopes to profit when the prices of the instruments return to their expected
relationship.

Among futures traders the most common type of spread involves taking opposing
positions in different delivery months for the same commodity. A trader might purchase
October crude oil and sell November crude oil on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Or he might buy December corn and sell July corn on the Chicago Board of Trade. The
value of this type of intra-market spread depends on a variety of factors, the most
important of which is usually the cost of carrying the physical commodity from one
delivery month to another.

Suppose that February gold on the COMEX is trading for $360 per ounce. What
should April gold be trading for? A trader who takes delivery of gold in February at $360
per ounce and holds it until April will incur a debit of $360 per ounce for a two-month
period. If interest rates are 9 percent annually, the two-month financing cost will be:

9% x 2/12 x $360 = $5.40

Given the financing cost of $5.40 per ounce that can be saved by purchasing an
April futures contract rather than purchasing the physical commodity, the April contract
ought to be worth $5.40 more than the February contract, or $365.40 per ounce. If the
February contract is trading at $360 and the April contract is trading at $364, the trader
knows that the spread is $1.40 too cheap. He can profit from this mispricing by
purchasing the spread for $4.00 (buy April for $364, sell February for $360). If the
spread returns to its expected value of $5.40, the trader can buy back the February
contract and sell out the April contract, thereby realizing a profit of $1.40.

Note that the above spread will be profitable regardless of the general direction of
the gold market, as long as the prices of the two delivery months return to their expected
$5.40 spread. If February gold rises to $370, the trader will lose $6 on the February side
of his spread. If, however, the April contract rises to $375.40, the gain in the value of
the April contract will more than offset the loss on the February contract and result in
the expected $1.40 per ounce profit.

Factors other than financing costs can also affect the price relationship between
different futures months for the same commodity. The futures price of some commodi-
ties must also include the cost of storing and insuring the commodity for the period
between delivery months. In theory, the cost of financing, storing, and insuring a
traditional commodity (precious metals, agricultural products, livestock, energy prod-
ucts, etc.) must be some positive number, so that the price of a more distant delivery
month ought to be greater than the price of a nearby delivery month. This is known as
a contango relationship. Any increase in these costs will increase the value of a futures
contract.

Supply and demand considerations can also affect the spread relationship of
different delivery months. In theory, a November crude oil contract ought to always


--- 第 140 页 ---

Introduction to Spreading 129

trade for more than an October crude oil contract. But if crude oil is currently in short
supply, refiners may be willing to pay more for an October futures contract in order to
ensure an uninterrupted flow of crude oil to their refineries. Markets where the near-by
delivery month is trading at a premium to the more distant months are said to be in
backwardation. Supply and demand for raw materials can often cause traditional
commodities markets to go into backwardation. Examples of contango and backwarda-
tion markets are shown in Figure 7-1.

The cost of carrying a position in an underlying commodity is only one of many
factors which can affect a futures spread relationship. A trader who purchases a stock
index futures contract will save the financing costs associated with owning the basket
of stocks which make up the index. At the same time, he gives up the rights to any
dividends he might receive if he actually owned the stocks. The savings in financing
costs add value to the futures contract, but the loss in dividends reduces the contract’s
value.

Matters can be further complicated if different interest rates play a role in the
evaluation of a spread relationship. The value of a treasury bond futures contract
depends not only on the carrying costs saved by purchasing a futures contract instead
of the actual bond (the short-term rate}, but also on the interest lost by not owning the
bond (the long-term rate]. Depending on the difference between short- and long-term
rates, distant delivery months in the treasury bond futures market can be trading at
either a premium to the nearby months or at a discount to the nearby months. Similar
types of considerations affect relationships in foreign currency futures markets, but here
the determining factors are the difference between domestic and foreign interest rates.
When foreign rates are low compared to domestic rates, the more distant months trade
at a premium; when foreign rates are high, the more distant months trade at a discount.

Calculating the spread relationship between different delivery months can be a
complex problem, and is covered more fully in texts focusing specifically on futures
trading. The point here is that, in theory, there ought to be a well defined price
relationship between different delivery months. When this relationship is violated in the
marketplace, a potential profit opportunity exists by selling the overpriced contract and
buying the underpriced.

Spreads need not be based solely on the relationship between different delivery
Months for the same commodity. They can also be based on presumed price relation-
ships between different, though usually related, instruments. The NOB (notes over
bonds) spread traded on the Chicago Board of Trade is based on the assumption that
there is an identifiable relationship between the price of Treasury Bonds and Treasury
Notes. When the spread between the prices of these two futures contracts is more or
less than expected, traders will sell one instrument and buy the other. For example,
with Treasury Notes at 99-162 and Treasury Bonds at 96-00, there is a 3-16 spread
between the two instruments. If a trader feels, based on his analysis of interest rates,

1, Because of their unique importance in financial markets, we will look at stock index futures and options
in detail in Chapter 15.

2. U.S. Treasury Bonds and Notes are traded in points and 325. 99.16 Tepresents a price of 99 16/32.


--- 第 141 页 ---

130 Chapter 7
Figure 7-1
Contango Markets
-Lifetime-
Month Open High Low Settie Change High Low
Friday, October 22, 1993
COCOA (CSCE); 10 metric tons; $ per gaiion (1 = $10.00)
Dec 1163 1166 4125 1134 -21 1506 919
Marg4 1200 1203 1161 4174 -20 1495 835
May 1215 1215 4172 1183 -24 1518 841
Jui 1226 1226 4190 1200 -23 1530 845
Sep 1237 1237 1220 1220 -20 1536 878
Mar95 1239 1239 1239 1239 -20 1346 980
COTTON (CTN); 50,000 ibs.; ¢ per ib. (.04 = $5.00)
Dec 87.74 57.94 57.20 57.55 19 64.25 $4.60
Maro4 59.35 59.45 58.85 59.17 -.20 64.20 55.62
May 60,10 60.30 59.75 59.95 +30 64.85 57.47
Jui 60.68 60.80 60.30 60.55 25 65.00 58.30
Oct 61.80 62.20 61.80 62.00 +35 64.00 59.81
Dec 61.50 62.20 61.35 62.10 +35 62.90 59.48
SOYBEAN MEAL (CBT); 100tons.; $ perton. (.04 = $10.00)
Dec 193.30 194.60 492.90 193.10 +30 235.50 183.40
Jan 493.30 194.70 193.10 193.40 ane 231.50 176.90
Mar 494.30 195.90 194.30 194.40 10 231.00 175.60
May 196.00 197.00 195.40 195.40 +.40 228.00 477.00
Jui 497.50 198.70 197.20 197.40 +.10 245.00 479.00
Aug 497.50 198.40 197.50 197.50 . 237.50 180.10
Backwardation Markets
-Lifetime-
Month Open High Low Settie Change High Low
Monday, December 10, 1990
CATTLE (CME); 44,000 ibs.; ¢perib. (.01 = $4.40)
Dec 79.97 80.75 79.97 80.70 +.78 79.77 71.00
Feb91 76.35 77.00 76,25 76.87 +.70 77.80 72.50
Apr 76.20 76.95 76.20 76,87 +65 78.05 74.00
Jun 74.10 74.65 74.10 74.55 +.50 75.45 72.16
Aug 72.70 73.42 72.70 72.92 +.35 73.85 70.35
Oct 72.70 73.05 72.70 72.90 +.48 72.85 70.70
COPPER (COMEX); 25,000 ibs.; ¢perib. (.04 = $2.50)
Jan 110.00 410.85 109.60 110.80 +1.30 126.40 91.50
Feb 109.00 109.80 108.90 109.80 +1.60 115.80 99.50
Mar 106.40 108.40 106.30 108.00 +2.00 122.60 92.30
Apr 106.00 108.00 106.00 107.20 +2.00 115.50 99.85
May 105.15 106.70 105.00 106.40 +2.05 417.80 97.00
Jui 103.80 105.30 103.80 104.80 +2.40 410.50 95.50
HEATING OiL (NYMEX); 42,000 gaiions; ¢ per galion (.01 = $4.20)
Jan 81.60 82.50 80.80 80.97 +1.80 107.25 52.95
Feb 79.00 79.20 77.60 77.76 +1.52 102.00 52.60
Mar 74.00 74.00 72.70 72.82 +.81 96.50 50.70
Apr 69.50 69.50 68.10 68.12 +.48 92.00 49.30
May 66.20 66.25 65.90 66.12 +11 88.50 48.40
Jun 64.75 64.75 64.00 63.22 -.14 85.75 48.40



--- 第 142 页 ---

Introduction to Spreading 131

that the spread between Notes and Bonds ought to be 3-00, he can sell the spread at
3-16 (sell Notes at 99-16, buy Bonds at 96-00). If the spread returns to its expected value
of 3-00, the trader can buy in his Notes and sell out his Bonds, realizing a profit of
1639,

Spreads can also be based on more complex relationships. Many traders on the
COMEX follow the price relationship between gold and silver. However, with gold at
$300 to $400 per ounce and silver at $4 to $5 per ounce (as of this writing), the
relationship is more commonly expressed as a ratio. Suppose a trader decides that the
spread between the two metals ought to be 80 ounces of silver to one ounce of gold (an
80:1 ratio). If silver is trading at $4.50, given the 80:1 price ratio, gold ought to be
trading at $4.50 x 80 = $360. If, however, gold is at $375, the spread trader will sell
one ounce of gold at $375, and buy 80 ounces of silver at $4.50. Regardless of the
general trend in prices of precious metals, he expects to make $15 when the spread
returns to its 80:1 ratio. If the precious metals market drops, so that gold is at $336 and
silver is at $4.20 (the expected 80:1 ratio), the trader’s total profit will be:

80 x ($4.20 - $4.50) = -$24 (silver)
$375 — $336 = +$39 (gold)

As expected, he has shown a profit of $15.

Spreads can also reflect a trader’s opinion that one contract will outperform a
different contract. Futures on the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index traded
on the New York Futures Exchange represent the value of approximately 1500 actively
traded stocks. Futures on the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index traded on the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange represent the value of 500 such stocks. If a trader believes the
relationship between the two index values ought to be 9 to 5 (9 NYSE = 4 S&P 500),
and the current prices are 220 and 396, the price relationship is, as expected, 9:5 (9 x
220 = 5 x 396). There does not seem to he any reason to either buy or sell the spread.
If, however, a trader believes that in percent terms the 500 stocks in the S&P will
outperform the 1500 stocks in the NYSE, he can buy five S&P contracts and sell nine
NYSE contracts. If, in percent terms, the S&P rises more quickly, or declines less quickly,
the trader will profit from the better performance of the contracts which he owns.

Spread relationships need not be restricted to two instruments. Sometimes three,
or even more, different instruments may define a spread relationship. We calculated that
if February gold is at $360, and interest rates are 9%, the spread between February and
April gold ought to be $5.40. If interest rates rise, the carrying costs will also rise, and
the February/April spread will widen. If a trader is long February gold and short April
gold, and he feels that Eurodollar interest rates correlate closely to his cost of carry, he
can sell Eurodollar futures to protect himself against a rise in interest rates. If interest
rates do rise, he will lose on his February/April spread, but this will be offset by the
profit on his Eurodollar position, He has made the assumption that there is a three-sided
spread relationship between the price of February gold, April gold, and Eurodollars.

Much of the most sophisticated trading in derivative markets involves identifying
and following spread relationships. When a trader decides that a spread relationship is


--- 第 143 页 ---

132 Chapter 7

mispriced in the marketplace, it can be just as profitable to buy or sell the spread as to
take an outright long or short position in a single instrument.

In the foregoing examples the price relationship between instruments was defined
in point or currency terms. In some cases, however, it may be more practical to define
the relationship in other terms. In Chapter 4 we used a theoretical pricing model to
determine an option’s implied volatility, and we noted that for an option trader the
implied volatility might be a more accurate reflection of an option’s price than its dollar
price. An option trader might therefore express the spread value between two options
in terms of the spread between their implied volatilities. An option with an implied
volatility of 15% and a different option with an implied volatility of 17% have a two-point
volatility spread, regardless of the difference in their dollar prices. If both options have
the same underlying instrument, a trader might purchase the option with an implied
volatility of 15% and sell the option with an implied volatility of 17%, hoping to profit
when the spread between the implied volatilities narrows.

As we shall see, the foregoing example is simplistic. An option trader cannot simply
buy options with low implied volatilities and sell options with high implied volatilities.
Not only is the spread between implied volatilities important, but also the general level
of implied volatility. A two-percentage-point volatility spread may mean one thing if the
implied volatilities are 6% and 8%, and something else if the implied volatilities are 26%
and 28%. Moreover, there are important considerations of risk arising from difficulties
in predicting volatility, as well as the possible inaccuracies in the models themselves. In
Spite of these factors, volatility spreads form one of the most important classes of option
trading strategies. Much of an option trader’s education is spent studying volatility
relationships, and learning to create spreads based on mispriced volatility.

In the previous examples we assumed that a spreading strategy was static, that once
the spread was initiated it was only necessary to wait for the spread to reach its expected
value. Spreads can also be dynamic, requiring action over the life of the spread in order
to profit from the mispricing. This was the method used in Chapter 5 to take advantage
of a mispriced option. The option was spread against the underlying contract, and the
position was adjusted over the life of the option. At expiration, the resulting profit was
approximately equal to the amount by which the option was originally mispriced.

WHY SPREAD?

We saw in Chapter 3 that most theoretical pricing models depend on the laws of
probability to generate option values. Even if we have correctly estimated the prob-
abilities, i.e., volatility, we know that probability theory is only valid over many
occurrences or, in the case of options, over long periods of time. A trader will sometimes
have to hold an option position for an extended period in order to profit from the
option’s mispricing. Unfortunately, while he is holding the position, over short periods
of time he may have to put up with adverse fluctuations in the position’s value. The
fluctuations might be severe enough that the trader, because of capital requirements,
will not be able to maintain the position. If he is forced to liquidate the position prior to


--- 第 144 页 ---

Introduction to Spreading 133

expiration, there is no guarantee that he will profit from the option’s mispricing, even
if he has accurately estimated all the inputs into the pricing model. By spreading, a trader
is attempting to reduce the effect of short-term “bad luck” that goes with any investment
based on the laws of probability.

Spreading strategies not only take advantage of the laws of probability by enabling
a trader to hold option positions over long periods of time, but such strategies also have
the effect of protecting the trader against incorrectly estimated inputs into the theoreti-
cal pricing model. Suppose a trader estimates that over the life of an option the volatility
of an underlying Deutschemark futures contract will be 13%. Based on this estimate he
finds that a certain call trading at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange has a theoretical
value of 1.75 but is actually trading for 2.00. If the call has a delta of 25, one strategy
is to sell four calls for 2.00 each and buy one futures contract, yielding a theoretical edge
of 4 x .25 = 1.00, or $1,250. (Each point in currency contracts at the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange is worth $1,250.) Of course, if the trader can make $1,250 with
a 4x 1 spread, it may occur to him that he can make $12,500 if he increases the size
of the spread to 40 x 10. Why stop now? He can make $125,000 if he increases the
size to 400 x 100.

Even if the market is sufficiently liquid to absorb unlimited size, is this a reasonable
approach to trading? Should a trader simply find a theoretically profitable strategy and
do it as many times as possible in order to maximize the profit potential? At some point
the intelligent trader will have to consider not only the potential profit, but also the risk
associated with a strategy. After all, his volatility estimate of 13% is just that, an estimate.
What will happen if volatility actually turns out to be some higher number, perhaps
15%, ot 17%? If the calls which he sold at 2.00 are worth 2.25 at a volatility of 17%,
and volatility actually turns out to be 17%, then his hoped-for profit of $125,000
(assuming a size of 400 x 100) will turn into a loss of $125,000.

A trader must always consider the effects of an incorrect estimate, and then decide
how much risk he is willing to take. If the trader in this example decides that he can
survive if volatility goes no higher than 15% (a two-percentage-point margin for error},
he might only be willing to do the spread 40 x 10. But if there were some way to
increase his break-even volatility to 19% (a six-percentage-point margin for error), he
tight indeed be willing to do the spread 400 x 100. Option spreading strategies enable
traders to profit over a wide variety of market conditions by giving them an increased
margin for error in estimating the inputs into a theoretical pricing model. No trader will
survive very long if his livelihood depends on estimating each input with 100%
accuracy. Even when he incorrectly estimates the inputs, the experienced trader can
survive if he has constructed intelligent spread strategies which allow fora wide margin
of error.

SPREADING AS A RISK MANAGEMENT TOOL

Recall our example in Chapter 3 where a casino is selling a roulette bet with an expected
return of 95¢ (American conditions) for $1.00. The casino owner knows that based on


--- 第 145 页 ---

134 Chapter 7

the laws of probability he has a 5% theoretical edge. Suppose that one day a bettor comes
into the casino and proposes to bet $2,000 on one number at the roulette table. The
casino owner knows that the odds are on his side and that he will most likely get to
keep the $2,000 bet. But there is always a chance that the player will win, and that the
casino will lose $70,000 (the $72,000 payoff less the $2,000 cost of the bet) if the
player’s number does come up.

Now suppose that two other bettors come into the casino, and each proposes to
place a $1,000 bet at the roulette table. They promise, however, to bet on different
numbers. Whichever number one bettor chooses, the other bettor will choose some
other number. As with the first bettor and his single bet of $2,000, the casino’s potential
reward in this new scenario is also $2,000, if neither of the two numbers come up. But
the risk to the casino is now only $34,000 (the $36,000 payoff if one player wins, less
the cost of the two $1,000 bets}. Since only one player can win, the two bets are
mutually exclusive: if one wins, the other must lose.

Given our two scenarios, one bettor wagering $2,000 on one number, or two
players wagering $1,000 each on different numbers, what is the theoretical edge to the
casino? The edge to the casino in both cases is still the same 5%. Regardless of the
amount wagered, or the number of individual bets, the laws of probability say that in
the long run the casino gets to keep 5% of everything that is bet at the roulette table. In
the short run, however, the risk to the casino is greatly reduced with two $1,000 bets
because the bets have been spread around the table.

A casino does not like to see a bettor wager a large amount of money on one
outcome, whether at roulette or any other casino game. The odds are still in the casino’s
favor. But, if the bet is large enough, and the bettor is lucky, short-term bad luck can
overwhelm the casino. Indeed, if a bettor knows that the odds are against him, and he
wanits the greatest chance of showing a profit, his best course is to wager the maximum
amount on one outcome, and hope that in the short run he gets lucky. If he continues
to Make bets over a long period of time, the laws of probability will eventually catch up
with him and the casino will end up with the bettor’s money. The ideal scenario from
the casino’s point of view is for 38 players to place 38 bets of $1,000 each on all 38
numbers at the roulette table. Now the casino has a perfect spread position. One player
will collect $36,000, but with $38,000 on the table the casino has a sure profit of
$2,000.

The option trader prefers to spread for the same reason that the casino prefers the
bets to be spread around the table: spreading maintains profit potential but reduces
short-term risk. There is no perfect spread position for the option trader, as there is for
a casino. But the intelligent option trader learns to spread off his risk in as many different
ways as possible in order to minimize the effects of short-term bad luck.

New traders are sometimes astonished at the size of the trades an experienced
trader is prepared to make. For example, an independent floor trader in Treasury Bond
options at the Chicago Board of Trade who buys 100 calls at 2-00 ($2,000) each has
taken a position worth $200,000. How can he afford to do this? His capital resources
certainly play a role in the risk he is willing to accept. But equally important is his ability


--- 第 146 页 ---

Introduction to Spreading 135

to spread off risk. An experienced trader may know a wide variety of ways to spread off
the risk associated with the 100 calls he purchased, either using other options, futures
contracts, cash bonds, or some combination of these instruments. He may not be able
to completely eliminate his risk. But he may be able to reduce it to such an extent that
his risk is actually less than that of a much smaller trader who does not know how to
spread, or knows only a limited number of spreading strategies.


--- 第 147 页 ---

ox 8 ~

Volatility Spreads

To take advantage of a theoretically mispriced option, it is necessary to hedge the
purchase or sale of the option by simultaneously taking an opposing market position. In
the examples in Chapter 5, the opposing market position was always taken in the
underlying instrument. It is also possible to hedge an option position with other options
which are theoretically equivalent to the underlying instrument. For example, suppose
we feel a certain call with a delta of 50 is underpriced in the marketplace. If we buy 10
calls, giving us a total delta position of +500, we can hedge our position in any of the
following ways:

* Sell five underlying contracts

* Buy puts with a total delta of -500

“+ Sell calls, different than those which we purchased, with a total delta of +500
“ Combine several of these strategies, such that we create a total delta of -500

With many different calls and puts available, as well as the underlying contract,
there are many different ways of hedging our ten calls. Regardless of which method we
choose, each spread will have certain features in common:

“ Each spread will be approximately delta neutral.

+ Each spread will be sensitive to changes in the price of the underlying
instrument.

* Each spread will be sensitive to changes in implied volatility.

“+ Each spread will be sensitive to the passage of time.

Spreads with the foregoing characteristics fall under the general heading of volatil-
ity spreads. In this chapter we will define the basic types of volatility spreads and look
at their characteristics, initially by examining the expiration values of the spread, and
then by considering the delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho associated with each spread.

Before defining the primary types of spreads, it should be noted that spreading
terminology is not uniform. Traders sometimes use different terms when referring to the
same spread; they sometimes use the same term when referring to different spreads. An
attempt has been made to use the most common terminology, but alternative spread
definitions are also given where appropriate.

137


--- 第 148 页 ---

138 Chapter 8

BACKSPREAD
(also referred to as a ratio backspread or long ratio spread)

A backspread is a delta neutral spread which consists of more long (purchased) options
than short (sold) options where all options expire at the same time. In order to achieve
this, options with smaller deltas must be purchased and options with larger deltas must
be sold. A call backspread consists of long calls at a higher exercise price and short calls
at a lower exercise price, A put backspread consists of long puts at a lower exercise price
and short puts at a higher exercise price.

Typical backspreads and their values at expiration are shown in Figures 8-1 and
8-2, (These, and the example spreads in the following sections, are taken from the
option evaluation table in Figure 8-20.) In each case, a move away from the long
option’s exercise price will increase the value of the spread. Depending on the type of
backspread, movement in one direction may be preferable to movement in the other
direction. In a call backspread the upside profit potential is unlimited; in a put
backspread the downside profit is unlimited. But the primary consideration is that some
movement will occur. If no movement occurs, a backspread is likely to be a losing
strategy.

Typically, a backspread is done for a credit. That is, the amount of premium
received for the sold options is greater than the premium paid for the purchased options.
This ensures that the backspread will be profitable if the market makes a large move in
either direction. If the market collapses in the case of a call backspread, or the market

Figure 8-1: Call Backspread

sall the buy the

lower higher
exercise exercise
price price
o <4 |
8 long 30 March 105 calls (24)
g short 10 March 95 calls (78)

long 25 June 110 calls (23)
short 10 June 100 calls (61)



--- 第 149 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 139

Figure 8-2: Put Backspread

buy the sell the
lower higher
exercise exercise
price price
S
oO —
a
6 long 80 March 90 puts (-6)
4

short 10 March 100 puts (-48)

Jong 45 June 95 puts (-30)
short 30 June 100 puts (-46)

explodes in the case of a put backspread, ail options will expire worthless and the trader
will keep the credit from the initial transaction.

A trader will tend to choose the type of backspread which reflects his opinion about
market direction. If he foresees a market with great upside potential, he will tend to
choose a call backspread; if he foresees a market with great downside potential he will
tend to choose a put backspread. He will avoid backspreads in quiet markets since the
underlying contract is unlikely to move very far in either direction.

RATIO VERTICAL SPREAD
{also referred to as a ratio spread, short ratio spread,
vertical spread, or front spread)

A trader who takes the opposite side of a backspread also has a delta neutral spread, but
he ts short more contracts than long, with all options expiring at the same time. Such a
spread is sometimes referred to as a ratio spread or a vertical spread. However, these
terms can also be applied to other types of spreads. In order to avoid later confusion, we
will designate the opposite of a backspread as a ratio vertical spread.

Typical ratio vertical spreads, and their expiration values, are shown in Figures 8-3
and 8-4. From these graphs we can see that a ratio vertical spread will realize its
maximum profit at expiration when the underlying contract finishes right at the short
(sold) option’s exercise price. Since a ratio vertical spreader assumes the opposite risks
of a backspreader, his risk is unlimited on the upside in a call ratio vertical spread, and


--- 第 150 页 ---

140

Figure 8-3: Call Ratio Vertical Spread

Chapter 8

long 20 March 96 calls (78)
short 30 March 100 calls (51)

= long 10 June 95 calls (67)
ie) short 30 June 110 calls (23)
oO
~~
n
9
° .
S f
buy the sell the
lower higher
exercise exercise
price price

Figure 8-4: Put Ratio Vertical Spread

long 20 March 95 puts (-21)
short 60 March 90 puts (-6)

long 15 June 105 puts (-62)

ad : short 20 June 100 puts (-46)
5 /
ts i
oa 1
a .
sell the buy the
lower higher
exercise exercise
price price



--- 第 151 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 141

unlimited on the downside in a put ratio vertical spread. While a ratio vertical spreader
expects the market to remain relatively stable, he will tend to choose either a call or put
ratio vertical spread in order to limit his losses if he is wrong. If he is primarily worried
about a swift rise in the market, he will choose a put ratio vertical spread; if he is
primarily worried about a swift fall in the market, he will choose a call ratio vertical
spread. In both cases, if the market does make a big move, his loss will be limited since
the calls can only collapse to zero if the market falls, and the puts can only collapse to
zero if the market rises.

STRADDLE

A straddle consists of either a long call and a long put, or a short call and a short put,
where both options have the same exercise price and expire at the same time. If both
the call and put are purchased, the trader is said to be long the straddle; if both options
are sold, the trader is said to be short the straddle. Typical long and short straddles, with
their expiration values, are shown in Figures 8-5 and 8-6,

While most straddles are executed with a one-to-one ratio (one call for each put),
this is not a requirement. A straddle can also be ratfoed, so that it consists of unequal
numbers of calls and puts. Any spread where the number of long market contracts (long
calls or short puts) and short market contracts (short calls or long puts) are unequal is
considered a ratio spread. The most common types of ratio spreads are backspreads and

Figure 8-5: Long Straddle

bu
= calls and puts
© at the same
oa exercise price
on
3
a

long 10 March 100 calls (51) : long 10 June 95 calls (67)
long 10 March 100 puts (-48) Y long 25 June 95 puts (-30)



--- 第 152 页 ---

142 Chapter 8

Figure 8-6: Short Straddle

short 30 March 105 calls (24)
short 10 March 105 puts {-75)

short 20 June 100 calls (51)
short 20 June 100 puts (-46)

Profit

sell

calls and puts
at the same

exercise price

Loss

ratio vertical spreads. But other spreads, including straddles, can be ratioed. This is
usually done to ensure that the spread is delta neutral.

A long straddle has many of the same characteristics as a backspread. Like a
backspread it has limited risk and unlimited profit potential. With a long straddle,
however, the trader’s potential profit is unlimited in either direction. If the market
moves sharply up or down, the straddle wil! realize ever increasing profits as long as the
market continues to move in the same direction.

A short straddle has many of the same characteristics as a ratio vertical spread. The
spread will realize its maximum profit if the market stays close to the call and put
exercise price. The spread has a limited profit potential, and unlimited risk should the
Market move violently in either direction.

The new option trader often finds long straddles attractive because strategies with
limited risk and unlimited profit potential offer great appeal, especially when the profit
is unlimited in both directions. However, if the hoped for movement fails to materialize,
he soon finds that losing money little by little, even a limited amount, can also be a
painful experience. This is not an endorsement of either long or short straddles. Under
the right conditions either strategy may be sensible. But the intelligent trader’s primary
concern ought to be the total expected return. If the strategy with the greatest expected
return also entails unlimited risk, a trader may have to accept that risk as part of doing
business.


--- 第 153 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 143

STRANGLE

Like a straddle, a strangle consists of a long call and a long put, ora short call and a short
put, where both options expire at the same time. In a strangle, however, the options
have different exercise prices. If both options are purchased, the trader is long the
strangle; if both options are sold, the trader is short the strangle. Typical long and short
strangles are shown in Figures 8-7 and 8-8.

Strangles have characteristics similar to straddles, and are therefore similar to
backspreads and ratio vertical spreads. Like a long straddle, a long strangle needs
movement to be profitable, and has unlimited profit potential should such movement
occur. Like a short straddle, a short strangle has unlimited risk in either direction, but
will show a profit if the underlying market remains in a narrow trading range.

If a strangle is simply identified by its expiration month and exercise prices, there
may be some confusion as to the specific options involved. A June 95/105 strangle
might consist of a June 95 put and June 105 call. But it might also consist of a June 95
call and a June 105 put. Both these combinations are consistent with the definition of
a strangle. To avoid confusion a strangle is commonly assumed to consist of out-of-the-
money options. If the underlying market is currently at 100 and a trader wants to
purchase the June 95/105 strangle, it is assumed that he wants to purchase a June 95
put and a June 105 call. When both options are in-the-money, the position is sometimes
referred to as a guts.

Figure 8-7: Long Strangle

ae lt calls (guts)

puts (Calls)

at a lower at a higher
£ exercise price exercise price
— i . i
£ i
a : 1
2
3

long 20 March 105 calls long 30 June 110 calls
long 20 March 95 puts fong 16 June 100 puts



--- 第 154 页 ---

144 Chapter 8

Figure 8-8: Short Strangle

short 30 March 110 calls short 10 June 95 calls
short 40 March 90 puts short 10 June 105 puts
=
Oo
2
oa
7)
w
S
sell sell
puts (calls) calls (puts)
at a lower at a higher
exercise price exercise price

Tn the absence of other identifying information, strangles, like straddles, are usually
executed with a one-to-one ratio (one call for each put). However, there is no law
against executing a strangle with some other ratio. If the call has a delta of 15 and the
put has a delta of —30, and a trader wants to be delta neutral, it is perfectly acceptable
to trade two calls for each put.

If we ignore the limited or unlimited risk/reward characteristics of backspreads,
long straddles, and long strangles, these spreads essentially differ in the degree of desired
movement. A backspread needs some market movement to show a profit, a long straddle
needs more movement, and a long strangle needs even greater movement. Indeed, a
strangle is usually considered the most highly leveraged of all option positions because
out-of-the-money options are cheap relative to other options. Several strangles can often
be purchased for the price of just one straddle. If significant movement occurs with such
a position, its value can increase dramatically. But there is a tradeoff. If movement fails
to occur, the position will swiftly lose its value through the passage of time.

The same considerations of degree are also true for ratio vertical spreads, short
straddles, and short strangles. A ratio vertical spread, a short straddle, and a short
strangle all want the market to sit still. But again, the strangle is considered the most
highly leveraged of these positions. If a trader sells several strangles and the market does
sit still his profits will usually be greater than if he had sold one straddle or done a
moderate sized ratio vertical spread. If, however, the market makes an unexpectedly
large move, short strangles also entail the greatest risk. All option positions are a tradeoff


--- 第 155 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 145

between risk and reward. If the reward is great, so is the risk; if the risk is small, so is
the reward.

Based on their similar characteristics, it is sometimes convenient to classify long
straddles and long strangles as special types of backspreads. This follows logically from
the definition of a backspread: long more contracts than short, with all options expiring
in the same month. A long straddle or strangle consists only of long options {long calls
and long puts), with all options expiring at the same time. Hence, these positions are
backspreads. (Even though the owner of a put has a short market position, he is said to
be long the put because he has purchased it.}

The same reasoning leads us to classify short straddles and strangles as special types
of ratio vertical spreads. Short straddles and strangles consist only of short options, with
all options expiring at the same time. Hence, the positions conform to our definition of
a ratio vertical spread.

BUTTERFLY

Thus far we have looked at spreads which involve buying or selling two different option
contracts. However, we need not restrict ourselves to two-sided spreads. We can also
construct spreads consisting of three, four, or even more different options. A butterfly
consists of options at three equally spaced exercise prices, where all options are of the
same type (either all calls or all puts} and expire at the same time. In a long butterfly the
outside exercise prices are purchased and the inside exercise price is sold, and vice versa
for a short butterfly.! Moreover, the ratio of a butterfly never varies. It is always 1 x 2
x 1, with two of each inside exercise price traded for each one of the outside exercise
prices. ff the ratio is other than 1 x 2 x 1, the spread is no longer a butterfly. Typical
examples of long and short butterflies are shown in Figures 8-9 and 8-10.

Since a butterfly consists of equal numbers of long and short options, it does not fit
conveniently into the backspread or ratio vertical spread category. However, as com-
monly traded, a long butterfly tends to act like a ratio vertical spread and a short butterfly
tends to act like a backspread. To understand why, consider a trader who buys a
95/100/105 call butterfly (long a 95 call, short two 100 calls, long a 105 call}. What
will be the value of this position at expiration? If the underlying contract is below 95 at
expiration all the calls will expire worthless, and the value of the position will be zero.
If the underlying contract is above 105 at expiration, the value of the 95 and 195 calls
together will be identical to the value of the two 100 calls. Again, the value of the
butterfly will be zero. Now suppose the underlying contract is somewhere between 95
and 105 at expiration, specifically, right at the inside exercise price of 100. The 95 call
will be worth 5 points, while the 100 and 105 calls will be worthless. The position will
therefore be worth 5 points. If the underlying moves away from 100 the value of the
butterfly will decline, but its value can never fall below zero.

1, The inside exercise price is sometimes referred to as the body of the butterfly, while the outside
exercise prices are referred to as the wings.


--- 第 156 页 ---

146

Figure 8-9: Long Buiterfly

Chapter 8

long 10 March 95 calls (78)
short 20 March 100 calls (51)
long 10 March 105 calls (24)

Profit

long 30 June 90 puts (-17)
short 60 June 95 puts (-30)
long 30 June 100 puts (-46)

Loss

buy a
call (put)
at a lower

sell two
calls (puts)
at a middle

exercise price exercise price

buy a
call (put)
at a higher
exercise price

Figure 8-10: Short Buiterfly

sella buy two sell a
call (put) calls (puts) call (put)
at a lower at a middle at a higher
exercise price exercise price exercise price

=
° : i
a | : a
2
2 i
a

short 20 March 100 puts {(-48)
long 40 March 105 puts (-75)
short 20 March 1410 puts (-91)

short 25 June 95 calls (67)
long 50 June 100 calls (51)
short 25 June 105 calls (36)



--- 第 157 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 147

At expiration a butterfly will always have a value somewhere between zero and the
amount between exercise prices. It will be worth zero if the underlying contract is
below the lowest exercise price or above the highest exercise price, and it will be worth
its maximum if the underlying contract is right at the inside exercise price.

Since a butterfly has a value between zero and the amount between exercise prices
(5 points in our example), a trader should be willing to pay some amount between zero
and 5 for the position. The exact amount depends on the likelihood of the underlying
contract finishing right at or close to the inside price at expiration. If there is high
probability of this occurring, a trader might be willing to pay as much as 414 or 414 for
the butterfly, since it might very will expand to its full value of 5 points. If, however,
there is a low probability of this occurring, and consequently a high probability that the
underlying contract will finish outside the extreme exercise prices, a trader may only be
willing to pay 14 or ¥%, since he may very will lose his entire investment.

Now we can see why a long butterfly tends to act like a ratio vertical spread. Ifa
trader feels that the underlying contract will remain within a narrow range until
expiration, he can buy a butterfly where the inside exercise price is at-the-money. If he
is right, and the market does stay close to the inside exercise price, the butterfly will
expand to its maximum value (Figure 8-9). A long butterfly tends to act like a ratio
vertical spread since it increases in value as the underlying market sits still.

In contrast, the trader who sells a butterfly wants the underlying market to move
as far away from the inside exercise price as possible so that the position will expire with
the underlying contract either below the lowest exercise price or above the highest
exercise price. In this case, the butterfly will expire worthless and he will be able to
keep the full amount he received when he sold the butterfly (Figure 8-10). A short
butterfly tends to act like a backspread since it increases in value with movement in the
underlying market.

Why are the strategies in Figure 8-9 referred to as “long” butterflies, and the
strategies in Figure 8-10 referred to as “short” butterflies? It is common practice to refer
to a spread which requires an outlay of capital as a long, or purchased, spread. If a trader
initiates a butterfly by purchasing the outside exercise prices and selling the inside
exercise price, he has a position which can never be worth less than zero at expiration.
The trader can therefore expect to lay out some amount of capital for the position when
he initiates it. When the trader does this, he has purchased, or is “long,” the butterfly.
(If a trader can initiate a long butterfly for a credit, he should do it as many times as the
law will allow; he can’t lose.) When the trader sells the outside exercise prices and
purchases the inside exercise price, he can expect to receive some amount of capital.
He has sold, or is “short,” the butterfly.

Since all butterflies are worth their maximum amount when the underlying
contract is right at the inside exercise price at expiration, both a call and put butterfly
with the same exercise prices and the same expiration date desire exactly the same
outcome, and therefore have identical characteristics. Both the March 95/100/105 call
butterfly and the March 95/100/105 put butterfly will be worth a maximum of 5 with
the underlying contract right at 100 at expiration, and a minimum value of zero with
the underlying contract below 95 or above 105. If both butterflies are not trading at the


--- 第 158 页 ---

148 Chapter &

same price, there is a sure profit opportunity available by purchasing the cheaper and
selling the more expensive.2

Ifa trader foresees a quiet market, why might he choose a long butterfly over some
other type of strategy, for example a short straddle? An important characteristic of a
butterfly is its limited risk. Ifa trader initiates a long butterfly in the belief that the market
is unlikely to move very far from the current price, the most he can lose if he is wrong
is the amount he laid out to purchase the butterfly. On the other hand, if a trader sells
a straddle and the market makes a large move, his potential risk is unlimited. Regardless
of theoretical considerations, some traders are not comfortable with the possibility of
unlimited risk. If given the choice between purchasing butterflies and selling straddles,
they will prefer the former strategy to the latter.

Of course the straddle, while riskier, also has greater profit potential. If a trader
intends to purchase butterflies but wants a potential profit commensurate with that of
a short straddle, he will have to trade butterflies in much greater size. A trader who is
considering the sale of 25 straddles might decide instead to buy 100 butterflies (100 x
200 x 100). While trading 100 spreads may appear riskier than trading 25 spreads, 100
butterflies may tn fact be much less risky than 25 straddles because of the risk
characteristics associated with a butterfly. A trader should never confuse size and risk.
Risk often depends on the characteristics of the strategy, not on the size in which the
strategy is executed.

TIME SPREAD
{also referred to as a calendar spread or horizontal spread)

If all options in a spread expire at the same time, the value of the spread is simply a
function of the underlying price at expiration. If, however, the spread consists of options
which expire at different times, the value of the spread cannot be determined until both
options expire. The spread’s value depends not only on where the underlying market is
when the short-term option expires, but also on what will happen between that time
and the time when the long-term option expires. Time spreads, sometimes referred to
as calendar spreads or horizontal spreads,? consist of opposing positions which expire
in different months.

The most common type of time spread consists of opposing positions in two options
of the same type (either both calls or both puts] where both options have the same
exercise price. When the long-term option is purchased and the short-term option ts
sold, a trader is long the time spread; when the short-term option is purchased and the
long-term option is sold, the trader is short the time spread. Since a long-term option
will have more time value, and therefore a higher price than a short-term option, this is
consistent with the practice of referring to any spread which is executed at a debit
(credit) as a long (short) spread position.

2. This is not necessarily the case if the spreads consist of American options, where there Is a possjbility
of early exercise. A sure profit would exist only if one were certain of carrying the position to expiration.

3. Expiration months were originally listed horizontally on exchange option displays. Hence the term
horizontal spread.


--- 第 159 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 149

Although time spreads are most commonly executed one-to-one (one contract
purchased for each contract sold}, a trader may ratio a time spread to reflect a bullish,
bearish, or neutral market sentiment. For the present we will assume that all time
spreads will be ratioed delta neutral. Typical long and short time spreads are shown in
Figures 8-11 and 8-12.

A time spread has different characteristics from the other spreads we have dis-
cussed, because its value depends not only on movement in the underlying market, but
also on other traders’ expectations about future market movement as reflected in the
implied volatility. If we assume that the options making up a time spread are approxi-
mately at-the-money, time spreads have two important characteristics.

A long time spread always wants the underlying market to sit still. An important
characteristic of an at-the-money option’s theta (time decay) is its tendency to become
increasingly large as expiration approaches. As time passes, a short-term at-the-money
option, having less time to expiration, will lose its value at a greater rate than a long-term
at-the-money option. (Note the value of at-the-money options in Figures 6-13 and 6-14,
and the theta values in Figure 6-15.) This principle has an important effect on the value
of a time spread.

For example, suppose two at-the-money calls, one with three months to expiration
and one with six months to expiration, have values of 6 and 71, respectively. The value
of the spread is therefore 14%. If one month passes and the underlying market is
unchanged, both options will lose value. But the short-term option, with its greater
theta, will lose a greater amount. If the long-term option loses '/, the short-term option

Figure 8-11: Long Time Spread (Value at Near Term Expiration)

tong 10 June 95 puts (-31)

long 20 June 100 calls (61) short 10 March 95 puts (21)

short 20 March 100 calls 61)

Profit

buy a long term option
at one exercise price

Loss

sell a short term option
of the same type
at the same exercise price



--- 第 160 页 ---

150 Chapter 8

Figure 8-12: Short Time Spread (Value at Near Term Expiration)

buy a short term option
at one exercise price

= sell a long term option
2 of the same type
o at the same exercise price
“Hn
8 *long 10 March 1085 calls (24) long 25 March 100 puts (-48)
4 short 10 June 110 cails (23) short 25 June 100 puts (-47)

“technically a diagonal spread, but with many of the
same characteristics as a time spread

may lose a full point. Now the options are worth 5 and 7%, and the spread is worth
2%. If another month passes and the market is still unchanged, both options will
continue to decay, But, again, the short-term option, with less time remaining to
expiration, will decay at a greater rate. If the long-term option loses %4, the short term
option may lose 2 points. Now the options are worth 3 and 6%, and the spread has
increased in value to 3%, Finally, if at expiration the market is still unchanged, the
short-term option, since it is still at-the-money, will lose all of its remaining value of 3
points. The long-term option will continue to decay but will do so at a slower rate. If
the long-term option loses %4, it will be worth 6 points, and the spread will be worth 6
points (Figure 8-13).

What will happen if the underlying market makes a larger move? Assume as before
that both options are at-the-money and have values of 74 and 6. As the underlying
market rises and options move more deeply into-the-money, they begin to lose their time
value. If the move is large enough, it won’t matter that the long-term option has three
more months remaining to expiration. Both options will eventually lose all their time
value (see Figures 6-15 and 6-16). If the time spread consists of calls, both of which have
exercise prices of 100, and the underlying market moves from 100 to 150, both options
might trade at parity (intrinsic value), or 50 points. The spread will then go to zero. Even
if the long-term option retains as much as 4 point, the spread will still have collapsed to 44.

What about a large downward move in the underlying market? The situation is
almost identical to an upward move. As an option moves further out-of-the-money its



--- 第 161 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 151

Figure 8-13: The Effect of Time Passage on Time Spreads
Time to Expiration

Long-term option 6 months 5 months 4 months 3 months
Short-term option 3 months 2 months 4 month none
Option Value

Long-term option Tia ™% 6% 6
Short-term option 6 5 3 QO
Spread Vaiue 1% 2M 3% 6

time value also begins to shrink. Here, however, neither option will have any intrinsic
value, so that if the market moves down far enough both options will eventually be
worthless. If that happens, the time spread will be worthless. If, as above, the long-term
option retains even 1% point in value, the spread will still collapse to 14 point.

Since a short-term at-the-money option always decays more quickly than a long-
term at-the-money option, regardless of whether the options are calls or puts, both a
long call time spread and a long put time spread want the underlying market to sit still.
Ideally, both spreads would like the short-term option to expire right at-the-money so
that the long-term option will retain as much time value as possible while the short-term
option expires worthless.

Ifa long time spread wants the market to sit still, logically a short time spread wants
the market to move. It may therefore seem that, as with backspreads and ratio vertical
spreads, the major consideration in deciding whether to initiate a long or short time
spread is the likelinood of movement in the underlying market. Certainly time spreads
are sensitive to movement in the price of the underlying, but time spreads are also
sensitive to changes in implied volatility.

A long time spread always benefits from an increase in implied volatility. Look
again at Figure 6-18, the relationship between an option’s vega (sensitivity to a change
in volatility) and the time remaining to expiration. As time to expiration increases, the
vega of an option increases. This means that a long-term option is always more sensitive
in total points to a change in volatility than a short-term option with the same exercise
Price.

For example, assume again that a 100 call time spread is worth 114 (long- and
short-term options with values of 714 and 6, respectively). Assume also that the value
of the spread is based on a volatility of 20%. What will happen to the value of the spread
if we raise volatility to 25%? Both options will increase in value since an increase in
volatility increases the value of all options, But the long-term option, with more time
Temaining to expiration and therefore a higher vega, will gain more value as a result of
the increase in volatility. If the short-term option gains 14, the long-term option may
gain a full point. Now the options will be worth 814 and 614, and the spread will have
widened from 11% to 2 (Figure 8-14).


--- 第 162 页 ---

152 Chapter 8

Figure 8-14: The Effect of Volatility on Time Spreads

Voiatility 15% 20% 25%
Option Value

Long term option 6% 7% 8%
Short term option 5% 6 6%
Spread Vaiue 1 1% 2

Conversely, if we lower our volatility estimate to 15%, both options will lose value.
But the long-term option, with more time remaining to expiration, will be more sensitive
to the change in volatility and will lose a greater amount. The new option values might
be 6!4 and 514, causing the spread to narrow to | point.

The effects of volatility on a time spread become especially evident when there is
a change in implied volatility in the option market. When implied volatility rises, time
spreads tend to widen; when implied volatility falls, time spreads tend to narrow. This
effect can often be great enough to offset either a favorable or unfavorable move in the
underlying market. A trader who is long a time spread expects to lose money if the
underlying market makes a swift move in either direction, He knows that time spreads
begin to collapse as the options move into- or out-of-the-money. But if this movement
is accompanied by a sufficient increase in implied volatility, the increase in the spread’s
price due to the increase in implied volatility may actually be greater than the loss due
to market movement. In that case the trader may find that the spread has actually
widened. Conversely, if the market sits still, the trader expects the spread to widen
because of the short-term option’s greater time decay. But if, at the same time, there is
a collapse in implied volatility, the decline in the spread’s price due to the decline in
implied volatility may more than offset any gain from the passage of time. If this happens,
the trader may find that the spread has narrowed.

These two opposing forces, the decay in an option’s value due to the passage of
time and the change in an option’s value due to changes in volatility, give time spreads
their unique characteristics. When a trader buys or sells a time spread, he is not only
attempting to forecast movement in the underlying market. He is also trying to forecast
changes in implied volatility. The trader would like to forecast both inputs accurately,
but often an error in one input can be offset by an accurate forecast for the other input.

Ideally, the trader who is long a time spread wants two apparently contradictory
conditions in the marketplace. First, he wants the underlying market to sit still so that
time decay will have a beneficial effect on the spread. Second, he wants everyone to
think the market is going to move so that implied volatility will rise. This may seem an
impossible scenario, the market remaining unchanged but everyone thinking it will
move. In fact, this happens quite often because events which don’t have an immediate
effect on the underlying market could be perceived to have a future effect on the market.

Suppose an announcement is made that the finance ministers of the major indus-
trialized countries plan to meet to discuss exchange rates. If no one knows what the


--- 第 163 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 153

outcome of the meeting will be, there is unlikely to be any significant move in the
currency markets when the initial announcement is made. On the other hand, all
traders will assume that major changes in exchange rates could result from the meeting.
This possibility will result in an increase in implied volatility in the currency option
market. The lack of movement in the underlying market, together with the increase in
implied volatility, will cause time spreads to widen.

Suppose that, as a result of the meeting, the finance ministers decide to maintain
the status quo. Now expectations of a major change in exchange rates fade, implied
volatility falls, and, as a result, time spreads narrow.

Scenarios with similar consequences also occur in the interest rate options market
when a policy statement is expected from the Federal Reserve in the United States, or
when a company’s earnings are due to be reported in the stock option market. These
events are unlikely to have an effect on the underlying market before the fact, but they
could have significant repercussions after the fact.

The effect of implied volatility is what distinguishes time spreads from the other
types of spreads we have discussed. Backspreads (including long straddles, long stran-
gles, and short butterflies) and ratio vertical spreads (including short straddles, short
strangles, and long butterflies) want real volatility (price movement in the underlying
market} and implied volatility (a reflection of expectations about future price movement
in the underlying market} to either both rise or both fall. A swift move in the underlying
market or an increase in implied volatility will help a backspread. A quiet market or a
decrease in implied volatility will help a ratio vertical spread. With time spreads,
however, real and implied volatility have opposite effects. A big move in the underlying
market or a decrease in implied volatility will help a short time spread, while a quiet
market or an increase in implied volatility will help a long time spread. This opposite
effect is what gives time spreads their unique characteristics.

While the foregoing characteristics of time spreads apply to all option markets,
there may be other considerations, depending on the specific underlying market. We
previously assumed that the price of the underlying contract for both the short- and long-
term option was the same. In the stock option market this will always be true because
the underlying for every expiration is the same stock. The underlying contract for all
IBM options, regardless of the expiration month, is always IBM stock. And IBM stock
can only have a single price at any one time. In contrast, the underlying for a futures
option is a specific futures contract. Consider this situation for Eurodollar futures and
options traded at the CME:

March Eurodollar Futures = 93.90
June Eurodollar Futures = 93.75

Suppose a trader initiates a long time spread:

long 10 June 94.00 calls
short 10 March 94.00 calls

The underlying for March Eurodollar options is a March Eurodollar futures con-
tract; the underlying for June Eurodollar options is a June Eurodollar futures contract.


--- 第 164 页 ---

154 Chapter 8

While the March and June Etrodollar futures contracts are related, they are not
identical. It is not impossible fo' one futures contract to go up while the other goes
down. As a result, in additior to volatility considerations, a trader who buys a
June/March Eurodollar option all time spread also has to worry about the risk of the
June futures contract falling whib the March futures contract is rising. Is there any way
to offset this risk?

If, in our example, the sprad between the March and June futures contracts,
which is currently .15, begins b widen, the option spread will narrow regardless of
volatility considerations. If, however, when the trader initiates the option spread, he
also executes a futures spread bypurchasing March futures and selling June futures, he
will have a position which willoffset any loss to the option spread resulting from a
widening in the futures spread.

How many futures spreads should the trader execute? He ought to trade the
number of futures spreads requid to be delta neutral. If the delta of both options is 40
and the trader executes the optien spread ten times, he will be long 400 deltas in June
and short 400 deltas in March. Tierefore, he should buy 4 March futures contracts and
sell 4 June futures contracts, “he entire spread will look like this (deltas are in
parentheses):

long 10 June 94.00calls (40) short 4 June futures (100)
short 10 March 94.)0 calls (40) long 4 March futures (100)

This type of balancing is 10t necessary, indeed not possible, in stock options
because the underlying for all maths is identical. There is no such thing as March IBM
stock or June IBM stock.

THE EFFEC] OF CHANGING INTEREST
RATIS AND DIVIDENDS

Thus far we have considered ony the effects of changes in the price of the underlying
market and changes in volatility2n the value of volatility spreads. What about changes
in interest rates and, in the case )f stocks, dividends?

Because there is no carrying cost associated with the purchase or sale of a futures
contract, interest rates have onlya minor impact on futures options, and, consequently,
a negligible effect on the value o futures option volatility spreads.4 If, however, we are
trading stock options and changethe interest rate, we change the forward price of stock
(the current stock price plus th carrying cost on the stock to expiration). When all
options expire at the same time as they do in backspreads and ratio vertical spreads,
the forward stock price for all optons remains the same, so that the effects of the change
are practically negligible. If, on te other hand, we are considering stock options with
different expiration dates, we mut consider two different forward prices. And these two
forward prices may not be equaly sensitive to a change in interest rates. For example,
consider the following situation:

4. Interest rates can of course affect tie relative value of different futures months. As noted, we can offset
this risk by trading a futures spreal along with the futures option time spread.


--- 第 165 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 155

Stock price=100 Interestrate=12% Dividend =0
Suppose a trader initiates a long time spread:

long 10 June 100 calls
short 10 March 100 calls

If there are three months remaining to March expiration and six months remaining to
June expiration, the forward prices for March and June stock are 103 and 106,
respectively. If interest rates drop to 8 percent, the forward price for March will be 102
and the forward price for June will be 104. With more time remaining, the June forward
price is more sensitive to a change in interest rates. Assuming the deltas of both options
are approximately equal, the June option will be more affected in total points by the
decline in interest rates than the March option, and the time spread will narrow. In the
same way, ifinterest rates increase, the time spread will widen because the June forward
price will rise more quickly than the March forward price. Therefore, a long (short) call
time spread in the stock option market must have a positive (negative) rho.

Changes in interest rates have just the opposite effect on stock option puts. In our
example, if interest rates fall from 12% to 8% the March forward price will fall from 103
to 102, while the June forward price will fall from 106 to 104. Again, if we assume that
the deltas of both options are approximately equal, and recalling that puts have negative
deltas, the June put will show a greater increase in value than the March put. The put
time spread. will therefore widen. In the same way, if interest rates increase, the put
time spread will narrow. Therefore, a long (short) put time spread in the stock option
market must have a negative (positive) rho.

The degree to which stock option time spreads are affected by changes in interest
rates depends primarily on the amount of time between expiration dates. If there are six
months between expiration dates (e.g., March/September) the effect will be much
greater than if there is only one month between expiration dates (e.g., March/April).

Changes in dividends can also affect the value of stock option time spreads.
Dividends, however, have the opposite effect on stock options as changes in interest
rates (see Chapter 3). An increase (decrease) in dividends lowers (raises) the forward
price of stock. If all options in a volatility spread expire at the same time (backspreads,
ratio vertical spreads), the forward stock price will be identical for all options and the
effect on the spread will be negligible. But in a time spread, if a dividend payment is
expected between expiration of the short-term and long-term option, the long-term
option will be affected by the lowered forward price of the stock. Hence, an increase in
dividends, if at least one dividend payment is expected between the expiration dates,
will cause call time spreads to narrow and put time spreads to widen. A decrease in
dividends will have the opposite effect, with call time spreads widening and put time
spreads narrowing. The effect of changing interest rates and dividends on stock option
time spreads is shown in Figure 8-15.

Even if both options are deeply in-the-money, a call time spread in the stock option
market should always have some value greater than zero. If volatility is very low, the
spread should still be worth a minimum of the cost of carry on the stock between


--- 第 166 页 ---

156 Chapter 8

Figure 8-15

The Effects of Changing Interest Rates on Stock Option Time Spreads

Stock Price = 100; Volatility = 20%; Dividend = 0
Time to March expiration = 6 weeks
Time to June expiration = 19 weeks

If Interest rates are... 0% 38% 6% 9% 12%
June 100 call 4.81 §.35 §.92 6.52 7.15
March 100 call 271 2.88 3.05 3.24 3.43
Call Spread Value 2.10 2.47 2.87 3.28 3.72
June 100 put 4.81 4.26 3.76 3.30 2.88
March 100 put 271 2.53 2.37 2.21 2.06
Put Spread Value 2.10 1.73 1.39 1.09 82

The Effect of Changing Dividends on Stock Option Time Spreads

Stock Price = 100; Volatility = 20%; Interest Rate = 6.00%
Time to March expiration = 6 weeks
Time to June expiration = 19 weeks

if the quarterly dividendIs... 0 1.00 2.00 3.00 4,00
June 100 call 5.92 4.84 3.82 2.97 2.26
March 100 call 3.05 2.53 2.07 1,66 1.31
Call Spread Value 2.87 2.28 1,75 1.31 95
June 100 put 3.76 4.62 5.62 6.75 8.01
March 100 put 2.37 2.84 3.37 3.96 4.62
Put Spread Value 1.39 1.78 2.25 2.79 3.39

expiration months, This is only true, however, ifa trader can carry a short stock position
between expiration months. If a situation arises where no stock can be borrowed, the
trader who owns a time spread may be forced to exercise his long-term option, thereby
losing the time value associated with the option.

As an example, suppose in February a company’s stock is trading at 70, when a
tender offer is made to buy a portion of the outstanding stock at a price of 80. Ifa trader
is long a June/March 70 call time spread, he will be assigned on the March 70 call
because the holder of that call wants to tender his stock for sale at 80. The trader is now
short stock and long a June 70 call. The June call should still carry some time value
because of the interest which can be earned on the short stock to June expiration. But
in order to carry a short stock position, the trader must deliver the stock to the exerciser
of the March 70 call. To deliver the stock, he must borrow it from someone. Unfortu-
nately, no one will lend stock to the trader because everyone wants to tender the stock
for sale at the tender price of 80. Unless the trader wants to go into the market and buy
the stock at the tender price of 80, he will be forced to exercise his June 70 call. This is
the only method by which the trader can obtain stock for delivery to the exerciser of


--- 第 167 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 157

the March 70 call. Even though the June 70 call should in theory have some time value,
the trader will be forced to discard the time value in order to fulfill his delivery
obligation.

In the foregoing situation, sometimes referred to as a short squeeze, a trader is
forced to exercise calls with some time value remaining because no stock can be
borrowed to carry a short stock position. Anyone who owns the June/March 70 call
time spread will be forced to exercise the June 70 call, and the price of the time spread
will collapse to zero. Note that this situation is not the same as a buy-out, where all the
stock in a company is purchased at one price. Although a tender offer was made at 80,
it was for only a portion of the company’s outstanding stock. When the tender is
completed, the remaining stock will continue to trade, most likely at its pre-tender price
of 70.

DIAGONAL SPREADS

A diagonal spread is similar to a time spread, except that the options have different
exercise prices. While many diagonal spreads are executed one-to-one (one long-term
option for each short-term option), diagonal spreads can also be ratioed, with unequal
numbers of long and short market contracts. With the large number of variations in
diagonal spreads, it is almost impossible to generalize about their characteristics as we
can with backspreads, ratio vertical spreads, and long and short time spreads. Each
diagonal spread must be analyzed separately, often using a computer, to determine the
risks and rewards associated with the spread.

There is, however, one type of diagonal spread about which we can generalize. If
a diagonal spread is done one-to-one, and both options are of the same type and have
approximately the same delta, the diagonal spread will act very much like a conven-
tional time spread. An example of a such diagonal spread is shown in Figure 8-12.

OTHER VARIATIONS

The spreads we have thus far defined are the primary types of volatility spreads, and are
the ones most commonly executed in the marketplace. There are, however, some
variations of which the reader ought to be aware.

A Christmas tree (also referred to as a /adder) is a term which can be applied toa
variety of spreads. The spread usually consists of three different exercise prices where
all options are of the same type and expire at the same time. In a long (short) call
Christmas tree, one call is purchased (sold) at the lowest exercise price, and one call is
sold (purchased) at each of the higher exercise prices. In a long (short) put Christmas
tree, one put is purchased (sold) at the highest exercise price, and one put is sold
(purchased) at each of the lower exercise prices. Christmas trees are usually delta
neutral, but even with this restriction, there are many ways to execute the spread. Some
examples of Christmas trees are shown in Figure 8-16.

Long Christmas trees, when done delta neutral, can be thought of as particular
types of ratio vertical spreads. Such spreads therefore increase in value if the underlying
market either sits still or moves very slowly. Short Christmas trees can be thought of as


--- 第 168 页 ---

158 Chapter &

Figure 8-16
Long Christmas Trees Short Christmas Trees
long 10 March 95 calls (78) short 5 June 90 calls (81)
short 10 March 100 calls (61) long § June 100 calls (51)
short 10 March 105 calls (24) long § June 105 calls (36)
long 25 June 110 puts (—75) short 50 March 110 puts (-91)
short 25 June 100 puts (47) long 50 March 105 puts (-75)
short 25 June 95 puts (—31} long §0 March 95 puts (-21)

particular types of backspreads, and therefore increase in value with big moves in the
underlying market.

It is possible to construct a spread which has the same characteristics as a butterfly
by purchasing a straddle (strangle) and selling a strangle (straddle) where the straddle is
executed at an exercise price midway between the strangle’s exercise prices. All options
must expire at the same time. Because the position wants the same outcome as a
butterfly, it is known as an iron butterfly. Like a true butterfly, at expiration an iron
butterfly has a minimum value of zero and a maximum value of the amount between
exercise prices.

Note that if the straddle is purchased and the strangle is sold, the position will result
in a debit (a long iron butterfly}. Such a position will show its greatest profit at expiration
if the underlying market finishes beyond the outside (strangle’s) exercise prices. A long
iron butterfly is therefore equivalent to a short butterfly. If the straddle is sold and the
strangle is purchased, the position will result in a debit (a short iron butterfly). Such a
position will show its greatest profit at expiration if the underlying market finishes right
at the inside (straddle’s) exercise price. A short iron butterfly is therefore equivalent to
a long butterfly. Examples of long and short iron butterflies are shown in Figure 8-17.

Another variation on a butterfly, known asa condor, can be constructed by splitting
the inside exercise prices. Now the position consists of four options at consecutive
exercise prices where the two outside options are purchased and the two inside options
sold (a long condor), or the two inside options are purchased and the two outside
options sold (a short condor). As with a butterfly, all options must be of the same type
fall calls or all puts) and expire at the same time.

At expiration a condor will have its maximum value, equivalent to the amount
between consecutive exercise prices, when the underlying contract is at or anywhere
between the two inside exercise prices. It will be worthless whenever the underlying
contract is outside the extreme exercise prices at expiration. Note that this is very similar
to a butterfly, except that a condor has a maximum value over a wider range of
underlying prices. A butterfly will achieve its maximum value at expiration at only one
underlying price, when the underlying contract is right at the inside exercise price. For
this reason a condor will usually have a higher value than a butterfly with approximately
the same exercise prices. Examples of long and short condors are shown in Figure 8-18.



--- 第 169 页 ---

Volatility Spreads

Figure 8-17

Long iron Butterfiles

long 10 March 100 calls (51)

long 10 March 100 puts (—48)
short 10 March 105 calls (24)
short 10 March 95 puts (-21)

long 50 June 100 calls (51)

long 50 June 100 puts (-47)
short 50 June 110 calls (23)
short 50 June 90 puts (—17)

159

Short Iron Butterflies

short 15 June 100 calls (51)
short 15 June 100 puts (-47)
long 15 June 105 calls (36)
long 15 June 95 puts (-31)

short 25 March 105 calls (24)
short 25 March 105 puts (-75)
long 25 March 110 calls (8)
Jong 25 March 100 puts (-48)

SPREAD SENSITIVITIES

Just as every individual option has a unique delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho
associated with it, every spread position has unique sensitivities. These numbers can
help a trader determine beforehand how changing market conditions are likely to affect
the spread. Before proceeding further the reader may want to review Figure 6-27, which
summarizes the significance of the signs associated with the various option sensitivities,

A trader who initiates a volatility spread is concerned primarily with the magnitude
of movement in the underlying contract and only secondarily with the direction of
movement. Therefore all volatility spreads will be approximately delta neutral (the
deltas will add up to approximately zero). It is true that some volatility spreads may
prefer movement in one direction rather than the other, but the primary consideration
is whether movement of any type will occur. If a trader has a large positive or negative
delta, such that directional considerations become more important than volatility
considerations, then the position can no longer be considered a volatility spread.

All spreads which are helped by movement in the underlying market have a positive
gamma. These include backspreads, long straddles, long strangles, short butterflies, and
short time spreads. All spreads which are hurt by movement in the underlying market
will have a negative gamma. These include ratio vertical spreads, short straddles, short

Figure 8-18

Long Condors

long 10 March 90 calls (93)
short 10 March 95 calls (78)
short 10 March 100 calls (51)
long 10 March 105 calls (24)

long 25 June 95 puts (-31)

short 25 June 100 puts (~47)
short 25 June 105 puts (-62)
long 25 June 110 puts (—75)

Short Condors

short 50 March 95 puts (-21)
long 50 March 100 puts (—48)
long 50 March 105 puts (~75)
short 50 March 110 puts (-91)

short 5 June 90 calls (81)
long 5 June 95 calls (67)
long 5 June 100 cails (51)
short § June 105 calls (36)


--- 第 170 页 ---

160 Chapter 8

strangles, long butterflies, and long time spreads. A trader who has a positive gamma is
sometimes said to be ong premiumand is hoping for a volatile market with large moves
in the underlying contract. A trader who has a negative gamma is sometimes said to be
short premium and is hoping for a quiet market with only small moves in the underlying
market.

Since the effect of market movement and the effect of time decay always work in
opposite directions, any spread with a positive gamma will necessarily have a negative
theta. Any spread with a negative gamma will necessarily have a positive theta. If market
movement helps, the passage of time hurts. If market movement hurts, the passage of
time helps. An option trader can’t have it both ways.

Spreads which are helped by a rise in volatility have a positive vega. These include
backspreads, long straddles, long strangles, short butterflies, and long time spreads.
Spreads which are helped by a decline in volatility have a negative vega. These include
ratio vertical spreads, short straddles, short strangles, long butterflies, and short time
spreads. In theory, the vega refers to the sensitivity of a theoretical value to a change in
the volatility of the underlying contract over the life of the option. In practice, however,
traders tend to associate the vega with the sensitivity of an option’s price to a change in
implied volatility. Spreads with a positive vega will be helped (hurt) by any increase
(decrease) in implied volatility. Spreads with a negative vega will be helped (hurt) by
any decrease (increase) in implied volatility.

The delta, gamma, theta, and vega associated with the primary types of volatility
spreads are summarized in Figure 8-19. Since the delta of a volatility spread is assumed
to be approximately zero, and since the theta is always of opposite sign to the gamma
but of similar magnitude, we can place every volatility spread into one of four categories
based on the sign of the gamma and vega associated with the spread:

Category Gamma Vega
Backspread Positive Positive
Ratio Vertical Spread Negative Negative
Long Time Spread Negative Positive
Short Time Spread Positive Negative

If a trader is approximately delta neutral—no matter how complex the position,
even if it includes options of different types, at many different exercise prices, and with
several different expiration dates—he can always place the position in one of these four
general categories based on the gamma and vega of the position. The extent to which
he is pursuing one of these strategies will depend on the magnitude of the gamma and
vega. A trader with a gamma of —-100 and vega of +200 would describe his position as
a long time spread, but not nearly to the degree of a trader who has a gamma of -1500
and a vega of +3000.

Figure 8-20 is an evaluation table with the theoretical value, delta, gamma, theta,
and vega of several different options. Following this table are examples of volatility
spreads of the types discussed in this chapter, along with their total delta, gamma, theta,
and vega. (Although the examples in Figure 8-20 are based on futures options, the


--- 第 171 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 161

Figure 8-19: Characteristics of Volatility Spreads

Spread Type Delta Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position
Backspread 0 + - +
Long Straddle 0 + - +
Long Strangle 0 + +
Short Butterfly 0 + - +
Ratio Vertical Spread 0 - + ~
Short Straddle 0 - + ~
Short Strangle 9 - + ~
Long Butterfly 0 - + ~
Long Time Spread 0 ~ + +
Short Time Spread 0 + - -

spread characteristics are equally valid for stock options.) The reader will see that each
spread does indeed have the positive or negative sensitivities summarized in Figure
8-19. Note also that a volatility spread need not be exactly delta neutral. (Indeed, as we
saw in Chapter 6, no trader can say with any certainty whether he is delta neutral.) A
practical guide is for the delta to be close enough to zero so that the volatility
considerations are more important than the directional considerations.

Note that no price is given for any of the option contracts in Figure 8-20, and
therefore no theoretical edge can be calculated for any of the spreads. The prices at
which a spread is executed may be good or bad, resulting in a positive or negative
theoretical edge. But once the spread has heen established, the market conditions which
will help or hurt the spread are determined by its type, not by the initial prices. Like all
traders, option traders must not let their previous trading activity affect their current
judgement. A trader’s primary concern ought never be what happened yesterday, but
what he can do today to make the most of the current situation, whether that means
maximizing his potential profit or minimizing his potential loss.

CHOOSING AN APPROPRIATE STRATEGY

With so many spreads available, how do we know which type of spread is best? First
and foremost we will want to choose spreads which have a positive theoretical edge to
ensure that if we are right about market conditions we can be confident of showing a
profit. Ideally, we would like to construct a spread by purchasing options which are
underpriced and selling options which are overpriced. If we can do this the resulting
spread, whatever its type, will always have a positive theoretical edge.

More often, however, our opinion about volatility will result in all options appear-
ing either underpriced or overpriced. When this happens, it will be impossible to both


--- 第 172 页 ---

Chapter 8

‘aoud owes ayy ye Gulpely ose sRIUON sainjny Yjoq yeu] owWNSsE eM Apolduuts 104 ,

S¥SOM 6} = UOHeIIdXxe O} OWL

est BELO Se Si- Ort esl 2 LO
lao 6h lo OE co gol bee” 0g FO"—
be? 99 LO'— Ze Lb- ‘Lb bea’ 9910°—
600° ESlo— 6% be~ soa 602" OFlLo’—
St" EELO— VS Zi- St pst o600"-
eBay eyul Buulues e1I°q anleaA eben eyOUuL
[eonai09yL
sind
%00'9 = SJeY JSGIS}U] %0'0% = ANNEIOA
SSO €0lo"— ee be- 9FOb sso y2lo—
ZOV oObco'— oF SL- c6'S 20h oszo"—
vel eleo— es s¢- 89% bel creo
ool’ cEZO"— ep bo- se oot’ bezo"—
Oro’ 0600°— Zt ZV ovo’ 6900"—
eben eyUL euwer e}/9q anjeA eBon eyeuL
feopaio3yL
sind

%00'9 = SPY }SO19}U|

%0'0S = AUINE|OA

SYOOM 9 = UONBIIdXY 0} Stu

2
oe
ce
6%
Me

&%
9€
4S
2g
18

euuey = B19

s11v9o

ee?
oP
es
ev
Zh
eutes

s11vo

8
ve
Is
BZ
€6
e190

zg'h ob une
LL@ sol unr
LLP oot unr
gh Z 6 unr
26°01 06 unr
ena 2oHd
fedjyasoey tL 9S|940X4

0000} =sainjng aunr

9c OLL JEW
so So} JeW
692 00} JEW
ces g6 Jew
oros 06 JEW
onleA oud
]B9]ya409Y4] SS|D198xX"

,00°00} = sainny yey
£661 Aremiqe4 ¢

speaids Ayynejoa Jo sejdwexg :oz-8 aunbi4

162


--- 第 173 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 163

Figure 8-20: Examples of Volatility Spreads (continued)

CALL BACKSPREAD: Long more calls than short; all calls expiring at the same time.

Deita Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position

Long 30 March 105 calls +80 x 24 430 x 4.6 +30 x-—.0250 430 x .107

Short 10 March 95 calls —~10 x 78 -10x4.3  -10x-0221  -10x.100
-60 +95.0 ~-.9710 +2,210

Long 25 Jun 110 calls +26 x 23 425x2.5 +25x -—0132 +25 .182

Short 10 Jun 100 calls -10 x51 -10x3.2 -10x~0166 -i10x.234
+65 +30.5 —.1640 +2,.210

PUT BACKSPREAD: Long more puts than short; all puts expinng at the same time.

Delta Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position
Long 80 March 90 puts +80 x -6 +80 x 1.7 +480 x -.0090 +80 x .040
Short 10 March 100 puts ~10 x -48 -10x58 -10 x -0313 -10 x .134
(*) +78.0 ~.4070 +1.860
Long 45 June 95 puts +45 x -31 +45x% 29 445 x -0151 +45 x .209
Short 30 June 100 puts ~30 x -47 ~30x3.2 -30x-.0166 -30 x 234
+15 +34.5 —1815 +2.385

CALL RATIO VERTICAL SPREAD: Short more calls than !ong; all calls expiring at the same time.

Delta Gamma Theta Vega

Position Position Position Position

Long 20 March 95 calls 420 x 78 +20 x 4.3 +20 x ~.0221 +20 x .100

Short 30 March 100 calls -30 x 51 -30 x 5.8 -30 x-.0313 -30x.134
+30 88.0 +.4970 -~2.020

Long 10 June 80 calls +10 x 81 +10 2.1 +10x-,0090 +10 .154

Short 20 June 105 calls —20 x 36 -20x3.0 ~-20x-.0160 -20x.221
+90 -~39,0 +.2300 -~2,880

PUT RATIO VERTICAL SPREAD: Short more puts than long; all puts expiring at the same time.

Deita Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position
Long 20 March 95 puts +20 x-21 +20 x 4.3 +20 x -.0232 +20 x .100
Short 60 March 90 puts -60 x -6 -60x1.7  -—60x-.0090 -60x.040
—60 16.0 +.0760 ~400
Long 15 June 105 puts +15 x-62 +15 x 3.0 415 x —.0149 +15 x 221
Short 20 June 100 puts -20 x -47 -20x3.2  -20x-0166 -20x.234

+10 -19.0 +.1085 1.365



--- 第 174 页 ---

164

Figure 8-20: Examples of Volatility Spreads (continued)

Chapter 8

LONG STRADDLE: Long calls and puts with the same expiration date and exercise price.

Long 10 March 100 calls
Long 10 March 100 puts

Long 10 June 95 calls
Long 25 June 95 puts

Delta
Position
+10 x +51
+10 x -48

+30

+10 x +67
+25 x —31
-105

Gamma
Position
+10x 5.8

+10 x 5.8

+116.0

+10 x 2.9

+25 x 2.9

+1015

Theta
Position
+10 x —0313
+10 x —.0313
~.6260

+10 x —0140
+25 x ~.0151
-.6175

Vega
Position
+10 x 134
+10 x .134
+2.680

+10 x 209
+25 x .209
47.315

SHORT STRADDLE: Short cails and puts with the same expiration date and exercise price.

Short 30 March 105 calls
Short 10 March 105 puts

Short 20 June 100 calis
Short 20 June 100 puts

Delta
Position

~30 x +24
—10 x—75
+30

-20 x +51
-20 x -47

—80

Gamma
Position
—30 x 4.6
-10 x 46
—184.0

-20 x 3.2
-20 x 3.2
-128.0

Theta
Position
~30 x -.0250
—10 x—.0240
+.9900

-20 x —.0166

20 x -.0166

+.6640

Vega
Position
-30 x .107
-10 x .107
~4,280

-20 x .234
-20 x .234
+9.36

LONG STRANGLE: Long calls and puts with the same expiration date but different exercise

prices.

Long 20 March 105 calls
Long 20 March 85 puts

Long 30 June 110 calls
Long 15 June 100 puts

Delta
Position
+20 x +24
+20 x —21
+60

+30 x +23
+15 x —47
-15

Gamma
Position
+20 x 4.6
+20 x 4.3
+178.0

+30 x 2.5
+15 * 3.2
+123.0

Theta Vega
Position Position
+20 x -.0250 +420 x .107
+20 x —.0232 +20 x .100
—.9640 +4.140
+80 x -.0132 +30 .182
+15x—0166 +15 234
—.6450 +8.970

SHORT STRANGLE: Short calls and puts with the same expiration date but different exercise

Prices.

Short 30 March 110 calis
Short 40 March 90 puts

Short 10 June 95 calls
Short 10 June 105 puts

Deita
Position
—30 x +8
-40 x -6

ie)

~-10 x +67
-10 x -62
—50

Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position
-30x2.3  -30x-.0124 -30x.055
-40x1.7 —40x-.0090 -40x.040
-137.0 +,7320 3.250
10x29 —-10x-0140 -10x.209
-10x3.0 -10x-0149 -10x.221
-§9.0 +.2890 —4.300


--- 第 175 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 165

Figure 8-20: Examples of Volatility Spreads (continued)

LONG BUTTERFLY: Short two options at the same exercise price, and long one option with
an immediately higher exercise price and one option with an immediately lower exercise price;
all options are of the same type and expire at the same time.

Deita Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position
Long 10 March 95 calls +10 x 78 +10x4.3 +10x—-0221 +10 x.100
Short 20 March 100 calls —20 x 81 -20x5.8 ~-20x -.03139 -20x.134
Long 10 March 105 calls +10 x 24 +10 x 4.6 +10x-.0250 +10x.107
Q -27.0 +,.1850 -.610
Long 30 June 90 puts +30 x-17 +30 x 2.1 +80 x~.0111 +80 .154
Short 60 June 95 puts -60 x-31 -60x2.9 -60x-.0151 -60~x,209
Long 30 June 100 puts +30 x -47 +80x3.2 -30x-0166 +30 .234
-60 ~15.0 +.0780 -.900

SHORT BUTTERFLY: Long two options at the same exercise price, and short one option with
an immediately higher exercise price and one option with an immediately lower exercise price;
all options are of the same type and expire at the same time.

Delta Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position
Short 20 March 100 puts -20 x -48 20x58 -20x~0313  -20x.134
Long 40 March 105 puts +40 x ~75 +40 x 4.6 +40 x-.0240 +40 x.107
Short 20 March 110 puts —20 x~91 -20 x 2.3 —20 x-.0103 ~20x,055
~220* +22.0 —.1280 +.500
Short 25 June 95 calls 25 x 67 -268x2.9  -25x-.0140 ~25 x .209
Long 50 June 100 calls +50 x 51 +50 x 3.2 +50 x-.0166 +50 x .234
Short 25 June 105 calls —25 x 36 —25 x 3.0 ~25 x~,0160 ~-25x.221
-25 +12.5 —.0800 +.950

* Note that because the ratio of a butterfly is always 1 x 2 x 1, the butterfly can become
unbalanced if the exercise prices are far away from the current underlying price.

LONG TIME SPREAD: Long a long-term option and short a short-term option where all op-
tions have the same exercise price and are of the same type.

Delta Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position
Long 20 June 100 calls 420 x51 +20x 3.2 +20x-.0166 +20 x .234
Short 20 March 100 calls =20 x 51 ~20 x 5.8 -20x-.0313 ~20x.134
0 $2.0 +.2940 +2.000
Long 10 June 95 puts +10 x-31 +10x 2.9 +10 x -.0151 +10 x .209
Short 10 March 95 puts -10 x -21 ~10x 43 -10 x-.0232 -10x.100

—100 14.0 +.0810 +1.090



--- 第 176 页 ---

166 Chapter 8

Figure 8-20: Examples of Volatility Spreads (continued)

SHORT TIME SPREAD: Short a long-term option and long a short-term option where all op-
tions have the same exercise price and are of the same type.

Delta Gamma Theta Vega
Position Position Position Position

Long 25 March 100 puts +25 x48 +25 x 6.8 +25 x ~.0313 +25 x 134
Short 25 June 100 puts -25 x47 -25x3.2 -25x-0166 -25~x.234

—25 +65.0 ~.3675 -2.500
“Long 10 March 1085 calls +10 x 24 410x 4.6 +10x-.0250 +10x.107
Short 10 June 110 calls -10 x 23 -10x25 -10x-.0132 —10x.182

+10 +21.0 -.1180 ~.750

* Although this is technically a diagonal spread, it will tend to act like a time spread because the
options have deltas which are approximately equal.

buy underpriced and sell overpriced options. Such a market can be easily identified by
comparing our volatility estimate to the implied volatility in the option marketplace. If
implied volatility is generally lower than our volatility estimate, all options will appear
underpriced. {f implied volatility is generally higher than our estimate, all options will
appear overpriced.

If options generally appear underpriced (low implied volatility), look for spreads
with a positive vega. This includes strategies in the backspread or long time spread
category. Jf options generally appear overpriced (high implied volatility), look for
spreads with a negative vega. This includes strategies in the ratio vertical or short time
spread category.

It may seem at first glance that if one encounters a market where all options are
either underpriced or overpriced, the sensible strategies are either long straddles and
strangles, or short straddles and strangles. Such strategies will enable a trader to take a
Position with a positive theoretical edge on both sides of the spread. Straddles and
strangles are certainly possible strategies when all options are too cheap or too expen-
sive. We will see in Chapter 9 that straddles and strangles, while often having a large,
positive theoretical edge, can also be among the riskiest of all strategies. For this reason,
a trader will often want to consider other spreads in the backspread or ratio vertical
spread category, even if such spreads entail buying some overvalued options or selling
some underpriced options.

The theoretical values and deltas in Figure 8-20 have been reproduced in Figures
8-21 and 8-22, but now prices have been included which reflect implied volatilities
different from the volatility input of 20%. The prices in Figure 8-21 reflect an implied
volatility of 17%. In this case the reader will find that only those spreads with a positive
vega will have a positive theoretical value:

call and put backspreads
long straddles and strangles


--- 第 177 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 167

Figure 8-21
IMPLIED VOLATILITY = 17%

March Futures= 100.00 ‘Time to Expiration =6 weeks —-Volatiliy= 20% Interest = 6.00%

CALLS PUTS
Exercise Theoretical Theoretical
Price Price Value Delta Price Value Delta
90 10,00 10.10 93 07 A7 6
95 5.54 §.82 78 57 85 21
100 2.28 2.69 $1 2.28 2.68 48
105 65 95 24 §.62 §.92 -76
110 12 26 8 10.05 10.16 91

June Futures = 100.00 Time to Expiration =13 weeks  Volalifity= 20% Interest = 6.00%

CALLS PUTS
Exercise Theoretical Theoretical
Price Price Value Delta Price Value Delta
90 10.54 10,97 81 75 1.18 +17
95 6.83 745 67 1.94 2.55 1
100 4.00 4.71 51 4.00 4.71 47
105 2.11 2.77 36 7.01 7.66 -€2
110 1.00 1.52 23 10.79 11.30 -75

Figure 8-22
IMPLIED VOLATILITY = 23%
March Futures = 100.00 ‘Time to Expiration =6 weeks Volatility =20% — Interest = 6.00%

CALLS PUTS
Exerclse Theoretical Theoretical
Price Price Value Delta Price Value Delta

90 10.23 10.10 93 30 A7 -6
95 6.12 §.82 78 1.16 85 21
100 3.09 2.69 §1 3.09 2.68 48
105 1.28 95 24 6.25 §.92 75
110 44 26 8 10.37 10,16 91

June Futures = 100.00 Time to Expiration =13 weeks Volatility= 20% Interest = 6.00%

CALLS PUTS
Exerclse Theoretical Theoretical
Price Price Value Delta Price Value Delta
90 11.45 10.97 81 1.66 1.18 -17
95 8.08 7.45 67 3.19 2.55 Hi
100 §.42 4.71 51 §.42 471 47
105 3.44 2.77 36 8.34 7.66 62

110 2.08 1.62 23 11.87 11,30 75



--- 第 178 页 ---

168 . Chapter 8

short butterflies
long time spreads

The prices in Figures 8-22 reflect an implied volatility of 23%. Now the reader will
find that only those spreads with a negative vega will have a positive theoretical value:

call and put ratio vertical spreads
short straddles and strangles
long butterflies

short time spreads

An important assumption in most theoretical pricing models is that volatility is
constant over the life of an option. The volatility input into the model is assumed to be
the one volatility which best describes price fluctuations in the underlying instrument
over the life of the option. When all options expire at the same time, it is this one
volatility which will, in theory, determine the desirability of a spread. In real life,
however, a trader may believe that volatility is likely to rise or fall over some period of
time. Very often implied volatility will also rise or fall. Since time spreads are particularly
sensitive to changes in implied volatility, whether volatility is rising or falling can affect
the desirability of time spreads. Consequently, we can add this corollary to our spread
guidelines: Long time spreads are likely to be profitable when implied volatility is low
but is expected to rise; short time spreads are likely to be profitable when implied
volatility is high but is expected to fall.

These are only general guidelines, and an experienced trader may decide to violate
them if he has reason to believe that the implied volatility will not correlate with the
volatility of the underlying contract. A long time spread might still be desirable in a high
implied volatility market, but the trader must make a prediction of how implied volatility
might change under certain conditions. If the market were to stagnate, with no
movement in the underlying contract, but the trader felt that implied volatility would
remain high, a long time spread would be a sensible strategy. The short-term option
would decay, while the long-term option would retain its value. In the same way, a short
time spread might still be desirable in a low implied volatility market if the trader felt
that the underlying instrument were likely to make a large move with no commensurate
increase in implied volatility.

ADJUSTMENTS

A volatility spread may initially be delta neutral, but the delta of the position is likely to
change as the price of the underlying contract rises or falls. Moreover, changes in
volatility and time to expiration can also affect the delta of spread. A spread which is
delta neutral today may not be delta neutral tomorrow, even if all other conditions
remain the same. The optimum use of a theoretical pricing model requires a trader to
continuously maintain a delta neutral position throughout the life of the spread.
Continuous adjustments are impossible in real life, so a trader ought to give some
thought to when he will adjust a position. Essentially, we can consider three possibili-
ties:


--- 第 179 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 169

1. Adjust at regular intervals—In theory, the adjustment process is assumed to
be continuous because volatility is assumed to be a continuous measure of the
speed of the market. In practice, however, volatility is measured over regular time
intervals, so a reasonable approach is to adjust a position at similar regular intervals,
If a trader’s volatility estimate is based on daily price changes, the trader might
adjust daily. If the estimate is based on weekly price changes, he might adjust
weekly. This is a trader’s best attempt to emulate the assumptions built into the
theoretical pricing model.

2. Adjust when the position becomes a predetermined number of deltas long
or short-—Very few traders insist on being delta neutral all the time. Most traders
realize that this is not a realistic approach, both because a continuous adjustment
process is physically impossible, and because no one can be certain that all the
assumptions and inputs in a theoretical pricing model, from which the delta is
calculated, are correct. Even if one could be certain that all delta calculations were
accurate, a trader might still be willing to take on some directional risk. Buta trader
ought to know just how much directional risk he is willing to accept. If he wants
to pursue delta neutral strategies, but believes that he can comfortably live with a
position which is up to 500 deltas long or short, then he can adjust the position any
time his delta position reaches this limit. Unlike the trader who adjusts at regular
intervals, a trader who adjusts based on a fixed number of deltas cannot be sure
how often he will need to adjust his position. In some cases he may have to adjust
very frequently; in other cases he may go for long periods of time without adjusting.

The number of deltas long or short a trader chooses for his adjustment points
depends on the size of his positions and his capitalization. A small, independent
trader may find that he is uncomfortable with a position which is even 200 deltas
long or short, while a large trading firm may consider a position which is several
thousand deltas long or short as being approximately delta neutral.

3. Adjust by fee-—This suggestion is not made facetiously. Some traders have
good market feel. They can sense when the market is about to move in one
direction or another. If a trader has this ability, there is no reason why he shouldn’t
make use of it. For example, suppose that the underlying market is at 50.00 anda
trader is delta neutral with a gamma of ~200. If the market falls to 48.00, the trader
can estimate that he is approximately 400 deltas long. If 400 deltas is the limit of
risk he is willing to accept, he might decide to adjust at this point. If, however, he
is also aware that 48.00 represents strong support for the market, he might choose
not to adjust under the assumption that the market is likely to rebound from the
support level. If he is right, he will have avoided an unprofitable adjustment. Of
course, if he is wrong and the market continues downward through the support
level, he will regret not having adjusted. If the trader is right more often than not,
there is no reason why he shouldn’t take advantage of this skill.


--- 第 180 页 ---

170 Chapter 8

ENTERING A SPREAD ORDER

In sophisticated option markets, spreads are traded as if they are one, single contract,
This means that a spread is quoted with a single bid price and a single offer price. For
example, suppose a trader is interested in buying a certain straddle and receives a quote
from a market-maker of 3.45/3,55. If the trader wants to sell the straddle, he will have
to do so at a price of 3.45 (the bid price}; if he wants to buy the straddle, he will have
to pay 3.55 (the ask price}. If the trader decides he is willing to pay 3.55, neither he nor
the market-maker care whether the trader pays 1.75 for the call and 1.80 for the put,
or 1.55 for the call and 2.00 for the put, or some other combination of call and put
prices. The only consideration is that the prices of the call and put taken together add
up to 3.55.

A market-maker will always endeavor to give one bid price and one ask price for
an entire spread. If the spread is a common type, such as a straddle, strangle, butterfly,
or time spread, a bid and ask can usually be given very quickly. Of course, market-mak-
ers are only human. If a spread is very complex, involving several different options in
unusual ratios, it may take a market-maker several minutes to calculate the value of the
spread. But regardless of the complexity of a spread, the market-maker will make an
effort to give his best two-sided (bid and ask} market.

Spread orders, like individual option orders, can be submitted with qualifying
instructions. The most common types are market orders (orders to be filled at the
current market price) and limit orders (orders to be filled at a specified price}, Other
contingency orders may also include instructions specifying how the order is to be
executed in the marketplace. The following contingency orders, all of which are defined
in Appendix A, are often used in option markets:

All Or None

Fill Or Kill

Immediate Or Cancel
Market If Touched
Market On Close

Not Held

One Cancels The Other
Stop Limit Order

Stop Loss Order

Two typical spread orders, submitted with their contingency instructions, are
shown in Figures 8-23a and 8-23b,

A broker executing a spread order is responsible for adhering to any special
instructions which accompany the order. Unless a trader knows exactly what current
market conditions are, or has a great deal of confidence in the broker who will be
handling the order, it is always a good practice to submit specific instructions with the
order as to how it is to be filled. Additionally, when one considers all the information
that must be communicated with a spread order (the expiration months, the exercise
prices, the type of options, whether the order is a buy or sell, the ratio), it is easy to see


--- 第 181 页 ---

Volatility Spreads 171

Figure 8-23a
FUTURES ORDER

Account Number Broker Memo.

OO Ee
$ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ23456789%S
SS SS

BUY SELL
75 Crude O1} SantAC 125 Crude Oil Feb. 190

2u <—— an indication of the —» y
, prices the broker
should look at

[x | 20 Gedrt AM or None

spread ratio spread price

how incorrect information might inadvertently be transmitted with the order. For this
reason, it ts also a good practice to recheck all orders before submitting them for

execution. Option trading can be difficult enough without the additional problems of
miscommunication.


--- 第 182 页 ---

172 Chapter 8

Figure 8—23b

spread ratio

\ Pont Debtt

spread price for
each 1 by 2 ratio

U24-U26

order to be executed
with OEX between
these prices

EX TIME



--- 第 183 页 ---

gy OD

Risk Considerations

Consider the prices and theoretical values shown in Figure 9-1. What categories of
volatility spreads might be profitable under these conditions? By comparing prices to
theoretical values, or by comparing the implied volatilities of the various options to the
volatility input of 15%, we can see that all options are overpriced. Recalling the general
guidelines in the last chapter, under the given conditions a trader will want to consider
spreads with a negative vega:

Call and Put Ratio Vertical Spreads
Short Straddles and Strangies

Long Butterflies

Short Time Spreads

Which of these categories is likely to represent the best spreading opportunity? And
within each category, which specific spread might be best?

CHOOSING THE BEST SPREAD

For the moment, let’s focus on May options only. Having eliminated the possibility of
time spreads, we will have to look for spreads in the ratio vertical category (negative
gamma, negative vega}. With ten different May options (five calls and five puts), it is
possible to construct a wide variety of spreads which fall into this category. How can
we make an intelligent decision about which spread might be best?

Suppose we choose three possible strategies and try to analyze them. The three
strategies which have been chosen are spreads 1, 2, and 3, shown in Figure 9-2.

These are certainly not the only possible spreads, nor can we be certain that they
are the best possible spreads. But in theory each spread ought to be profitable under the
given market conditions, since each fits into the ratio vertical spread category: spread 1
is a short straddle, spread 2 is a call ratio vertical spread, and spread 3 is a long put
butterfly. How can we evaluate the relative merits of each spread?

Initially it may appear that spread 1 is best since it has the greatest theoretical edge.
If the volatility estimate of 15% turns out to be correct, spread | will show a profit of
2.86, while spread 2 will show a profit of 1.00, and spread 3 will show a profit of only
40.

But is theoretical edge our only concern? If that were true we could simply do each
spread in bigger and bigger size to make the theoretical edge as large as we want. Instead
of doing spread 2 at 10 x 15, we might increase the size fivefold to 50 x 75. This will

173


--- 第 184 页 ---

Chapter 9

174

prLtL ool t900- 9'8 ¥9- ELS a6 ezZb oof s900- 9°8 ye 68° Ala zs
LL'4b 90L' Z900°- 26 9g- Lhe ces 60'Z1 901 6900- 26 ep poh Oph \S
8691 801° 6900- e&6 op- 2g) gL ze9t = BOL’ BGCO- —S ss zs 29'1 88'L os
plhdl €0l' 9900- 68 Ze- ZL'h vel zest = £0l’ «~p900- 68 19 Ard ors 6P
osZt 260’ og00- oO8 ez- QL ool ozZt 260° gs00~- o'8 OL ee'z e0'e a
Alea eben eyoy, ewwey eyeq snjeA sdud ANIReIOA eBeA Bou, eUWeD eYyeq snjeA 30nd |
patiduyy feonesoayL perdu leapesoeuL 28]240x%4
sind slivo
%00'S ‘eyey Jsesazu| %S) AUIPEIOA ‘SAEP J} | ‘UOWesGXy O}F OUI L ‘LOS :seurgng Aine
pz'el §s0° eg900- 86 BL- oe'2 66% 6e'Bl sso’ eZ00- B86 le ee es as
peril 990° Ze00- lel e8o- 90° eee 682 890° O600- 12l le “gy ZL 1S
OgZl 940° e600- vel sg el 6st 96°91 920° 6600- PEL yb co 2o'} os
Zvgt S$Zo0 g600- cel ae 16" Sol eo'4l §40° 4600- Eel Zs ork 9c'| 6P
OLZL «6990. Z800- BIL 6a es aL eSZl 990° E800- g'II OL z0'°% 6l~2 8p
AUIBEIOA eBeA eyou, ewwey eyEq aenjeA  adud Auneion eHaq eyUL eWWeD eYyeq senjeA 39d @o}dd
pepduy| jeonasoouL penduy feopezooyL @sjvIexy
Sind s11v9o

%00'S ‘eye ISele}U] LHSb cAWBEIOA ‘SAPP 9g :UOHerIdXy 0} Owl, ‘0S’ 6p ‘seunjny Aew
1-6 ounBi4



--- 第 185 页 ---

Risk Considerations 175

Figure 9-2
Delta Position Theoretical Edge
Spread 1: Short 10 May 50 calls @ 1.07 ~10 x +44 10x +15
Short 8 May 50 puts @ 1.59 -8 x -55 8 x4+.17
0 +2.86
Spread 2: Long 10 May 51 calls @ .77 +10 x +44 10x +15
Short 15 May 52 calls @ 53 -15 x +21 15x .20
-$ +1.00
Spread 3: Long 10 May 48 puts @ 1.05 +10 x-42 10x—14
Short 20 May 50 puts @ 1.59 -20 x -65 20x +17
Long 10 May §1 puts @ 2.22 +10 x-68 10 x-.16
0 +.40

increase the theoretical edge fivefold to 5.00, and ostensibly makes spread 2 a better
strategy than spreads 1 and 3. Clearly, theoretical edge can’t be the only consideration.

Theoretical edge is only an indication of what we expect to earn if we are right
about market conditions. Since there is no guarantee that we will be right, we must give
at least as much consideration to the question of risk. If we are wrong about market
conditions, how badly might we be hurt?

In order to focus on the risk considerations, let’s change the size of spreads 2 and
3 so that their theoretical edge is approximately equal to that of spread 1. We can
achieve this by tripling the size of spread 2 to 30 x 45, and increasing the size of spread
3 sevenfold to 70 x 140 x 70. The spreads in their new sizes with their total theoretical
edge and risk sensitivities are shown in Figure 9-3.

With all three spreads having approximately the same theoretical edge, we can now
focus on the risks associated with each spread,

As with all volatility spreads, one of the risk considerations is the possibility of an
incorrect volatility estimate. Since each spread has a negative vega, there will be no
problem if volatility turns out to be lower than 15%. In that case, the value of each
spread will increase and we will show a greater profit than originally expected. On the
other hand, if volatility turns out to be greater than 15%, this could present a problem.
What will happen if volatility turns out to be 17%, or 20%, or some higher number?
Each spread will be hurt due to the negative vega, but each spread may not be hurt to
the same degree.

One way to analyze the volatility risk associated with each spread is to use a
theoretical pricing model to simulate the value of each spread at increasingly greater
volatilities. From these values we can construct graphs reflecting each spread’s theoreti-
cal edge versus volatility. Such a graph is shown in Figure 9-4.

With our size adjustments each spread now has approximately the same initial
theoretical edge, enabling us to focus on the volatility risk associated with each spread.
Looking at Figure 9-4 we can see that each spread, 1, 2, and 3, loses its theoretical edge


--- 第 186 页 ---

Chapter 9

176

oso OLL0°+ o-86- 0 oge+
890 XOZF Z800— X OZ+ Ferx OZ+ B9- XOLF 9F-XOZ sind 4g Aew oZ+
920° x OFI- 8600— x OP I- VEL X OPI- SS- x OPI- ZU+X O¢L sind og Aew oFL—
SLO" x OL+ 8600°- x 02+ SEL xX OLt Zbp- x OL+ PL-XOL sind 6p AeW OZ+ :¢ peauds
Ser— sego'+ oeZ- sI- o0'e+
S50 X SP— €Z00— X Sb— 86 xSP bet x Sp— Og + xX S$ syeo 2g Aew Sp—
890° x Ost 0600"- x 06+ keLxoe+ Le+ x O&+ 0z- x 0€ seo 1g Aew os+ :z peadg
age" I- pdt a bee— ) 9e8'zt
9L0 xe— 3600-Xs—_ VErxe- so-xe— IVFxe_ sind o¢ Aew g-
920° x OL- 6600°- x O1- PEL xOl- bp+ XOl- Si+xOb seo og ABW O[- th peaids
UOlLSOd UCIISOd UOIUSOd uonsodd obpy
ebo, eeUuL ewuwer eyed jeoas0ouL
€-6 aunbi4



--- 第 187 页 ---

Risk Considerations 177

as volatility increases. But the slope of spread 1 is most severe. It loses its value very
quickly as volatility increases, much more quickly than spreads 2 and 3.

For each of our spreads we might logically ask how high volatility can rise before
we begin to lose money. That is, we might want to determine the break-even volatility,
or implied volatility, for each spread. This is simply an extension of the general definition
of implied volatility: the volatility which would have to occur over the life of an option,
or options, such that a position would show neither a profit nor a loss. It is common
among traders to determine the implied volatility of a spread position, just as they
determine the implied volatility of individual options. We can see from Figure 9-3 that
the implied (break-even) volatilities of spreads 1, 2, and 3 are approximately 17%, 20%,
and 22%, respectively.

From a volatility perspective, spread 3 shows the best risk/reward characteristics.
With each spread we are, ina sense, selling volatility, and we would like to do so at the
highest possible price. Would we rather sell something that’s worth 15% (our volatility
estimate) at 17% (the implied volatility of spread 1}, at 20% (the implied volatility of
spread 2), or at 22% (the implied volatility of spread 3}? The higher the implied volatility
of the spread, the greater the margin for error in our volatility estimate and, conse-
quently, the greater the likelihood of showing a profit. Spread 1 has only a 2-percent-
age-point margin for error, while spread 3 has a margin for error more than three times
greater, at 7 percentage points. Spread 2 falls somewhere in between.

Why are we so concerned about our volatility estimate being too low? A trader
might take the view that he is just as likely to overestimate as underestimate volatility.
Tf this happens, how will it affect the potential outcome of each spread? Suppose we
decide to do spread 1 and volatility turns out to be 18%, three percentage points higher
than our estimate of 15%. Looking at Figure 9-4 we can see that if this happens we will
lose approximately 1.21. Suppose, however, that there is an equal chance that volatility
will turn out to be 12%, three percentage points lower than our estimate. In Figure 9-5,
where we have extended volatility down to 10%, we can see that in this case we will
make approximately 6.95. In a more extreme case, when volatility turns out to be 20%
we will lose 3.95, But if volatility turns out to be 10% we will make 9.64, For each time
we underestimate volatility and show an unexpected loss, we might assume there will
be an equal number of times when we overestimate volatility and show an unexpected
profit. The end result of all these outcomes will be an average profit of approximately
2.86, the predicted profit of the spread at a volatility estimate of 15%.

Suppose that the average result of doing any one of our spreads, 1, 2, and 3, isa
profit of approximately 2.80. If the outcome in each case is identical, why should it
make any difference which spread we choose? While the end result is certainly an
important theoretical consideration, how the end result comes about may be an equally
important practical consideration.

Every trader knows that there are times when he shows a profit and times when
he shows a loss. No one wins all the time. In the long run, however, a good trader’s
profits will more than offset his losses. For example, suppose a trader chooses a strategy
which will show a profit of $7,000 half of the time, and which will show a loss of $5,000
the other half of the time. In the long run he will show an average profit of $1,000. But


--- 第 188 页 ---

178

Chapter 9

Figure 9-4

spread 3
(long butterfly)

Theoretical Profit & Loss

-105

spread 2

spread | (ratio vertical spread)

(short straddle)

18 20

Volatility (%)

Tt
19

spread 3
(long butterfly)

Theoretical Protit & Loss

spread 1
(short straddle)

spread 2
(ratio vertical spread)

16 18 20 22

Volatility (9%)

12° 24



--- 第 189 页 ---

Risk Considerations 179

suppose the first time the trader executes the strategy he loses $5,000 and the trader
only has $3,000? Now the trader will not be able to stay in business for all those times
when he is fortunate enough to show a profit of $7,000. Every trader knows that it is
only over long periods of time that good luck and bad luck even out. No experienced
trader will initiate a strategy where short-term bad luck might terminate his trading
career. This is the reason an experienced option trader will tend to avoid spread 1.

Any financial officer knows that it is much easier to manage a steady cash flow
rather than one that swings wildly. This is equally true for an option trader. He must
sensibly manage his finances so that he can avoid being ruined by the periods of bad
tuck which will inevitably occur, no matter how skillfully he trades,

An incorrect volatility estimate may not be the only risk with which an option
trader must be concerned. Every input into a theoretical pricing model represents a risk
to the trader since an incorrect input may alter an option’s theoretical value. These risks
are reflected in the delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho associated with a spread. We can
summarize these risks as follows:

Deita (Directional) Risk-—The risk that the underlying market will move in one
direction rather than another. When we create a position which is delta neutral, we are
trying to ensure that initially the position has no particular preference as to the direction
in which the underlying instrument will move. A delta neutral position does not
necessarily eliminate all directional risk, but it usually leaves us immune to directional
risks within a limited range.

Gamma (Curvature) Risk—The risk of a large move in the underlying contract,
regardless of direction. The gamma position is a measure of how sensitive a position is
to such large moves. A positive gamma position does not really have gamma risk since
such a position will, in theory, increase in value with movement in the underlying
contract. A negative gamma position, however, can quickly lose its theoretical edge with
a large move in the underlying contract. The consequences of such a move must always
be a consideration when analyzing the relative merits of different positions.

Theta (Time Decay) Risk—The risk that time will pass with no movement in the
underlying contract. This is the opposite side of gamma risk. Positions with positive
gamma become more valuable with large moves in the underlying. But if movement
helps, the passage of time hurts. A positive gamma always goes hand in hand with a
negative theta. A trader with a negative theta will atways have to consider the risk in
terms of how much time can pass before the spread’s theoretical edge disappears. The
position wants movement, but if the movement fails to occur within the next day, or
next week, or next month, will the spread, in theory, still be profitable?

Vega (Volatility) Risk—The risk that the volatility which we input into the theoretical
pricing model will be incorrect. If we input an incorrect volatility, we will be assuming
an incorrect distribution of underlying prices over time. Since some positions have a
positive vega and are hurt by declining volatility, and some positions have a negative
vega and are hurt by rising volatility, the vega represents a risk to every position. A trader


--- 第 190 页 ---

180 Chapter 9

must always consider how much the volatility can move against him before the potential
profit from a position disappears.

Rho (Interest Rate) Risk—The risk that interest rates will change over the life of the
option. A position with a positive rho will be helped (hurt) by an increase (decline) in
interest rates, while a position with a negative rho will show just the opposite
characteristics.! Generally, the interest rate is the least important of the inputs into a
theoretical pricing model, and it is unlikely, except for special situations, that a trader
will give extensive thought to the rho risk associated with a position.

So far we have compared only the volatility risk associated with spreads 1, 2, and
3. Is there any other risk with which we ought to be concerned? All of our spreads have
a negative gamma, so they will all be adversely affected by a large move in the
underlying contract. In order to compare the relative gamma risks, we can construct a
graph showing the values of the spreads at varying prices of the underlying contract.
This has been done in Figure 9-6. Again, we assume that each spread has approximately
the same theoretical value under our theoretical assumptions, in this case at the current
underlying price of 49.50.

Figure 9-6
4

spread 2
{ratio vertical spread)

spread 3
(long butterfly)

Theoretical Profit & Loss

-44 \
\
‘ ‘
6 spread 1
(short straddle)

-84

-10 T T T T T
47 48 49 50 Ley) 52 53

Underlying Price

1. Of course, we are only considering the interest rate risk as it applies to the evaluation of options.
Changes in interest rates can also affect the evaluation of an underlying contract, such as a bond, or
even the shares in a company. But that is a separate matter.


--- 第 191 页 ---

Risk Considerations 181

Looking at Figure 9-6 we can see that if the underlying contract makes a large
upward move, spread 3 will be the least affected. It can stand a move up to 52.75
without losing its positive theoretical edge. Spreads 1 and 2 can stand upward moves
to only 51.05 and 51.75, respectively. On the downside, spread 1 is still the riskiest
since it loses all its theoretical edge if the underlying market should make a swift move
down to 47.90. Spread 3 is less risky because it can stand a move down to 47.50. But
the least risky on the downside is clearly spread 2, since it never loses all its theoretical
edge. In the most extreme downward move the theoretical edge of spread 2 will
collapse to approximately zero.

PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Considering the vega and gamma risk, spread 3 seems to have the best risk charac-
teristics. It has a larger margin for error in terms of volatility than either spread 1 or 2.
In terms of underlying price movement it can also stand a larger upward move than the
other two spreads. Only when we consider the possibility of a large downward move
does spread 3 not display the best risk characteristics. In this case spread 2 comes in
first. But spread 3 still looks better than spread 1. {n theory, a trader ought to be more
willing to execute spread 3 than either spread 1 or 2. In the real world, however,
practical trading considerations may play a role in the trader’s decision.

Even though spread 3, the butterfly, appears to be the best theoretical choice of the
three, it has some practical drawbacks which may make it an unrealistic choice. Spread
3 is a three-sided spread, as opposed to spreads 1 and 2, which are two-sided. A
three-sided spread will probably be more difficult to execute in the marketplace, and is
likely to cost more in terms of the total width of the bid/ask. Ifa trader wants to execute
the complete spread at one time, as is most common, he may not be able to do so at his
target prices. If, on the other hand, he tries to execute one leg? at a time, he will be at
risk from adverse changes in the market until the other legs have been executed.

Additionally, there is the question of market liquidity. In order to obtain a
theoretical edge commensurate with spreads 1 and 2, it was necessary to increase the
size of the butterfly sevenfold to 70 x 140 x 70, If there is insufficient liquidity in the
May 49, 50, and 51 puts to support this size, it may not be possible to execute the
butterfly in the size required to meet our profit expectations. Alternatively, we may be
able to execute part of the spread at favorable prices, but as we increase the size, the
prices may become less satisfactory. Moreover, for a retail customer the increased size
may entail significantly greater transaction costs,

If trading considerations make spread 3 impractical, we may have to choose
between spreads 1 (the straddle) and 2 (the ratio vertical spread). If that happens, spread
2 is the clear winner. It allows fora much greater margin for error in both volatility (vega
risk) and underlying price change (gamma risk). A trader who is given a choice between
these two spreads will strongly prefer spread 2.

The choice of spreads may not always be as clear as in this example. The superiority
of spread 3, at least from the theoretical standpoint, was relatively obvious. Sometimes,

2. The options which comprise a spread position are sometimes referred to as the /egs of the spread.


--- 第 192 页 ---

182 Chapter 9

however, one spread may be superior with respect to one type of risk, while a different
spread may be superior with respect to a different risk.

Let’s consider three new spreads, 4 (a ratio vertical spread), 5 (a short time spread],
and 6 (a diagonal spread). The total theoretical edge of each spread, as well as their risk
sensitivities (all taken from the theoretical evaluation table in Figure 9-1), are shown in
Figure 9-7. In order to again focus on the risks associated with each spread, the size of
each spread has been adjusted to yield approximately the same theoretical edge.

Since each spread has a negative vega, we will want to consider the volatility risk
if volatility should turn out to be greater than our estimate of 15%. The sensitivity of
each spread to increasing volatility is shown in Figure 9-8. We can see that spread 4 has
an implied volatility of approximately 18.1%, spread 5 approximately 17.0%, and spread
6 approximately 17.2%. If an increase in volatility is our primary concern, then spread
4 (the ratio vertical spread) seems to offer the best risk characteristics.

In addition to the volatility risk, we can see that spread 4 also has a negative gamma,
so that it will be adversely affected by a sudden large move in the underlying contract.
If we are concerned about the possibility of such a move we may want to determine
exactly how a large move in the price of the underlying contract will affect the value of
the spread. Figure 9-9 shows the sensitivity of each of our spreads, 4, 5, and 6, to a
change in the price of the underlying contract.3

Note that spread 4 has the narrowest profit range of the three spreads, in theory
losing all its theoretical value if the market should immediately drop below 46.50 or rise
above 52.20. On the other hand, spread 6 has very little downside risk and can still
stand an immediate move upward to about 52.30. Ifa trader were worried about the
possibility of a swift fall in the market, he might be willing to give up the extra volatility
cushion offered by spread 4 over spread 6 (18.0% vs. 17.2%) for the additional downside
protection offered by the latter spread. This is reflected in the smaller negative gamma
associated with spread 6 as compared with spread 4.

Finally, we can see that spread 5, while having the least desirable volatility risk,
also has a positive gamma. This means that any large move in the underlying contract
will increase the value of the position. If a trader were worried about the possibility of
a sudden large move in the underlying contract, but were not overly concerned with an
increase in volatility, he might be willing to accept the less desirable volatility risk
associated with spread 5 for the more desirable positive gamma characteristics.

A trader who executes spread 5 will have a positive gamma, so he has no gamma
risk. But he will have a theta risk if the underlying contract fails to move. How great is
the risk? Figure 9-10 shows the sensitivity of all three spreads to the passage of time.
Since spreads 4 and 6 have negative gammas, they can only gain value with the passage
of time. On the other hand, spread 5 loses value as each day passes. Looking at the graph
associated with this spread, we can see that if no movement occurs in the underlying
contract, the spread loses all its theoretical edge after about 18 days. This is the price
one has to pay for the privilege of having a positive gamma.

3. We assume here that the May and July underlying contracts maintain the same approximate
relationship. That is, the July contract Is always 1.0123 times the May contract since 50.11/49.50 =
1.0123. The x-axis in Figure 9-9 is the price of the May contract.


--- 第 193 页 ---

183

Risk Considerations

ae OS Oo

Ove’ l—
QOL x 0¢c-
990° x OL+

0g8"b-
£0} x 0S-
990° x OSt+

ore'—
Oot" x Of-
Sot x 0+
uonised
eBon

OZbO'+
5900- *0e-
£800'-* Ob+

ose}’—
0900'— x 0S-
2800'- x OSt+

oZso'+
$900 '- x 0&—
6900'- x 02+
uopisod
eyOuL

o'gs—
98 x 02-
OEE XOL+

o'ogt+
08 x OS—
Ob x OSt

OeL-
Fexoe-—
£6 x 02+
uo}sog

ewuen

oz+
PEt x Oc-
OLt X OF

os-
8c- x OS-
6¢- x OSt

oe+
pet x Of—
egt x Oat
uontsod
esq

O6'et+
€a'+ xX 02
ZV-x OL

oo'e+
po'+ = OS
8t'-x 0S

oLat
Ed'+ x OF
te- x02

ebp3
jeopesooyL

seo 2g Aine o2-
seo gp ABW OL+

sind gp Ainr os—
sind gp Aew ost

syjeo 2g Ainr Of-
seo og Aint 02+

:9 peed

1g peoids

tp peaads

2-6 einBl4

RRR Da


--- 第 194 页 ---

184

Chapter $

Figure 9-8

spread 6
(diagonal spread)

Theoretical Profit & Loss

spread 4
(atio vertical spread)

spread 5
(short time spread)

7 T T T

19 20-24

Volatility (96)

+
18

Figure 9-9
10

8+
\
64

spread 6

44 (diagonal! spread)

N\

spread 5
(short time spree)

Theoretical Profit & Loss

(ratio vertical spread)

spread 4

47

48 49 50 54
Underlying Price (May Futures Contrac)

52 53



--- 第 195 页 ---

Risk Considerations 185
Figure 9-10
8
o
Z _
a 2
‘ ical Spread 6
% (ratio vertical spread) (diagonal spread) a
5 0 ———
a -
6 .o4 _— ~
2 “
a
QA a
F NS a spread 5
6) Ne (short time spread)
-8-
-10 T T T + 7 1 1
7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56

Time to Expiration (days)

If one has to choose from among spreads 4, 5, or 6, which spread is best? The
situation is not clear-cut, and the answer will probably depend on a trader’s experience
in the market. If he feels that an increase in implied volatility represents the greatest
risk, he will probably choose spread 4. If he feels that a large move in the underlying
contract represents the greatest risk, he will probably choose spread 5. And if he is
willing to settle for partial protection against both volatility and market movement, he
will probably choose spread 6.

As must by now be obvious, the choice of spreads is never a simple matter of right
and wrong. Like all trading decisions, it is a question of risk and reward. While there
are many risks with which an option trader must deal, he will often have to ask himself
which risk represents the greatest threat. Sometimes, in order avoid one type of risk, he
will be forced to accept a different risk. Even if the trader is willing to accept some risk
in a certain area, he may decide that he will only do so to a limited degree. Then he may
have to accept increased risks in other areas.

If given the choice between several different spreads a trader can use a Computer,
as was done in the foregoing examples, to study the risk characteristics of the different
spreads. Unfortunately, it may not always be possible to analyze the choices in such
detail. A trader may not have the necessary computer support at his disposal, or market
conditions may be changing so rapidly that if he fails to make an immediate decision
opportunity may quickly pass him by. Is there any way to make a quick comparison of
spreads without doing a detailed graphic analysis?


--- 第 196 页 ---

186 Chapter 9

One method that traders sometimes use is to think of every spread as a tradeoff
between risk and reward. We might express this tradeoff as a fraction, risk/reward. If
a trader goes into the marketplace, he would like to have the greatest possible reward.
At the same time he would like to have the least possible risk. Indeed, the ideal
risk/reward fraction would be 0 + o (zero risk, infinite reward}. But 0 + o = 0, so that
if we express the risk/reward characteristics of each spread as a fraction, risk/reward,
then in theory the spread whose fraction is closest to zero has the best tradeoff between
risk and reward.

What numbers should we use to express the risk and reward for a spread? The
reward is what we expect to make when we are right about market conditions. This is
simply the theoretical edge, and we can therefore make the theoretical edge the
denominator of our fraction. What about the numerator, or risk component? Here we
may have to deal with several different numbers since option positions are subject to
many different risks. These risks are represented by the various option sensitivities. The
practical approach is to express the numerator of our fraction with the sensitivity with
which we are most concerned. For example, if a change in volatility is our greatest
concern, we can use the vega of the spread as our numerator. If choosing from among
several different spreads, the spread whose vega/theoretical edge is closest to zero will
have the most desirable risk/reward characteristics. In the same way, if a large price
move is our greatest concern, the spread whose gamma/theoretical edge is closest to
zero will have the most desirable risk/reward characteristics.

Let’s try to analyze spreads 4, 5, and 6 using this method. One risk with which we
will certainly have to be concerned is the possibility of a change in volatility. Calculating
the vega/theoretical edge, we have:

Spread 4: -.840/2.70 = -311
Spread 5: -1.850/3.00 = -.617
Spread 6: ~1.340/2.90 = -.462

From the above calculations we can see that spread 4 has the best volatility
characteristics since its vega/theoretical edge is closest to zero. This is the same
conclusion we reached from Figure 9-8, but without the necessity of doing a detailed
study of each spread.

Note that when we divide the sensitivity of a spread by its theoretical value, the
result is independent of the size of the spread. If we had done spread 4 twice as large
(40 x 60 instead of 20 x 30} this would have doubled the size of both the vega and the
theoretical edge. The resulting fraction would still have been -.311.

What about the risk of a large move in the price of the underlying contract? We do
not need to worry about large price moves in spread 5 since its positive gamma means
that a large move can only enhance the value of the position. However, we might still
want to compare spreads 4 and 6 for gamma risk. Dividing the gamma by the theoretical
edge we have:

Spread 4: -72.0/2.70 = -26.7
Spread 6: -56.0/2.90 = -19.3


--- 第 197 页 ---

Risk Considerations 187

We can see that spread 6 is at less risk from a large move in the price of the
underlying contract because -19.3 is closer to zero than -26.7. This confirms the
conclusion from Figure 9-9.

Aword of warning about this method of estimating the relative riskiness ofa spread.
Because an option’s sensitivities are only well defined within a narrow range, dividing
the risk sensitivity by the theoretical edge offers only an estimate of the relative riskiness
of a position. Consider, for example, the relative volatility risks of spreads 1, 2, and 3.
Dividing the vega by the theoretical value for each spread we have:

Spread 1:  -1.368/2.86 =  -478
Spread 2: -435/3.00 = 145
Spread 3: -630/2.80 = -.225

From these numbers it appears that spread 2 is the least risky with respect to volatility
since —.145 is closer to zero than -.478 or —.225. But going back to Figure 9-4 we find
that spread 3 actually has the highest implied volatility, and therefore the least volatility
tisk. Even so, this method would have at least warned us away from spread 1, which
clearly has the greatest volatility risk.

Sometimes, if a trader is under great pressure to make a quick decision, he may not
have the time to make even a cursory analysis of relative riskiness of various spreads. In
such cases, he will often have to rely on his instincts in choosing a strategy. While there
is no substitute for experience, most traders quickly learn an important rule: straddles
and strangles are the riskiest of all spreads. This is true whether one buys or sells these
strategies. New traders sometimes assume that the purchase of straddles and strangles
is not especially risky because such strategies have limited risk. But it can be just as
painful to lose money day after day when one buys a straddle or strangle and the market
fails to move, as it is to lose the same amount of money all at once when one sells a
straddle and the market makes a violent move. Of course, a trader who is right about
volatility can reap large rewards from straddles and strangles. But an experienced trader
knows that such strategies offer the least margin for error, and he will usually prefer
other strategies with more desirable risk characteristics.

HOW MUCH MARGIN FOR ERROR?

New traders sometimes ask what is a reasonable margin for error in assessing the inputs
into a theoretical pricing model, particularly when it comes to the volatility input. As is
often the case, it will depend on the trader’s experience in the market in which he is
trading, In some cases, 5 percentage points may be an extremely large margin for error,
and the trader will feel very confident with any strategy passing such a test. In other
cases, five percentage points may be almost no margin for error at all, and the trader
will find that the strategy is a constant source of worry.

Perhaps a better way to approach the question is to ask not what is a reasonable
margin for error, but rather to ask what is the correct size in which to do a spread given
a known margin for error. Practical trading considerations aside, a trader should always
choose the spread with the best risk/reward characteristics. But sometimes even the


--- 第 198 页 ---

188 Chapter 9

best spread will have only a small margin for error, and consequently entail significant
risk. In such cases a trader, if he wants to make a trade, ought to do so in small size. If,
however, a trader can execute a spread with a very large margin for error, he ought to
be willing to do the spread in much larger size.

As an example, considet a trader whose best estimate of volatility in a certain
market is 15%. If implied volatility is higher than 15% he will look for positions with a
negative vega. If the best negative vega strategy the trader can find isa 1 x 2 ratio vertical
spread with an implied volatility of 1614% (only a 14-percentage-point margin for
error), he will almost certainly keep the size of his strategy small, perhaps executing the
spread only five times (5 x 10). If, however, the same spread has an implied volatility
of 25% (a 10-percentage-point margin for error), and the trader has never seen volatility
go that high, he may have the confidence to execute the spread in much larger size,
perhaps 50 x 100.4 The size of a trader’s positions should depend on the riskiness of
the positions, and this in turn depends on how much can go wrong without the strategy
turning against the trader.

DIVIDENDS AND INTEREST

In addition to the delta, gamma, theta, and vega risks which all traders must consider,
stock option traders might also have to consider the risk of changes in dividends and
interest rates.> This is especially true of time spreads, since options with different
expirations react differently to changes in these inputs.

Consider the evaluation table for stock options shown in Figure 9-11. With implied
volatilities well below the forecast of 27%, it makes sense to look for spreads with
positive vegas, Suppose we focus on four possible spreads shown in Figure 9-12. Spreads
7 and 8 are long time spreads, while spreads 9 and 10 are diagonal spreads. What are
the relative merits of each spread?

As with all option spreads, we have to consider a variety of risks. Note that in the
evaluation table in Figure 9-11 we used an interest rate of 8%. Suppose we believe that
interest rates are likely to rise sharply in the near future. How might these spreads react
to rising interest rates? We can see from Figure 9-13 that spreads 7 and 9 will be hurt
by rising interest rates, while spreads 8 and 10 will be helped. If a rise in interest rates
is our primary concern, we might focus on spreads 8 and 10, regardless of any desirable
vega or gamma characteristics associated with spreads 7 and 9.

If we focus on spreads 8 and 10, we will still want to consider the volatility risk.
We can do a cursory comparison of this risk by dividing the vega by the theoretical edge.
From this we find:

Spread 8: 1.380/6,45 | = 214
Spread 10: 2.774/6.14 ES 452

4. — Size, of course, is relative. To a well capitalized, experienced trader even 50 x 100 may be a small trade.

5. Futures options can also be affected by changes in interest rates since a change in interest rates will
affect the forward price of the underlying futures contract. Unlike stocks, factors other than interest
rates, such as short term supply and demand, can also affect these contracts.


--- 第 199 页 ---

189

a

sez zez 6600- 2 zo 6r'Ol %6 roar eez g9z0- oS ge £0'F %”AE sol
zee ere zelo- — sv’ os- er xg sez eve 26z0- =e os e's S 00
L've cee Grlo- = 2% 6E- cep “AP vps eee 8620-8 19 28 %L sé
AMeioA eBeA BEY, eu EYed = OnIeA soug ANNEIOA eBeq eyoyL eUWeD eyed NA = Sold 80ld
peydw! feopesoeuL penduy feonesoouL @s)010X4
sind si1vo anne
ere ezloslo- = SE al- Lv’8 7} Sve ezl' oseO- =—s« SE 82 69'1 %l gO}
ove Igp z9zo- WE g¢- avs Ye eve Ist ofpo- SE Sb 6z'e He ool
74 ze o4ezo- = 9e- 99% iA ose Ze 6gero- = EE +9 6L'S 5 66
Amen eBej Bou, ewWeD eyeg = oneA solid AMINEIOA eBeA eyo, eWUeD eNed = eMieA = eld ald
pod] jeonosoauL paduy jeopeioey, => = 88] 8XF
sind slivo HOUVIN

shep 61} pue skep gz Ul
gz'l puepinig pepedxy 00'S WEL] "LT OUNE ‘MLZ YOIRIN :AUINEIOA ‘shep Zp} eunc ‘skep 9g YEW OWL = $4, 86 :80Ud YOOIS

Lb-6 ean6ig

Risk Considerations


--- 第 200 页 ---

Chapter 9

190

pillar
ori’ x Ol-
cee x ett

see’ t+
Gh x OL-
cee x ot+

ose L+
GLX SL—-
cya x G+

gloor+
orl x GSZ-
2’ * Got
uosed
ebon

yar0—-
gebO- x Ol-
g9c0"— x BL +

s6r0'+
2£920"— x OL—
Shox St+

0200'+
O€bO- x St-
2620'— x Sit

oove'+
1ezo— x S2—
gb Lo— x 92+
uonsod
eeu

oy'st
EXO
eex ert

ge
sex ol-
Cox St+

Ola
BEXSi-
voxstt

gS ce-
9'€ x S2—-
fox Gat
UOISOd
euuwer

bet

vot X OL-

8e+ x Slt

se—-
Sg~ x OL-
6E- x Gt

Slt
Sot x Gh-
Ost x SI+

gi—-
9E-x Ge-
6E- X Got
UORIsod
eyed

phot
6Z£-XOl
elt+x el

og’o+
Ze-xol
so'+ x Gt

Spot
ov xX St
se+xGt

sig+
th’ x Se
eg't+ x Ge

a6py
feopaioeyy

$]29 $6 YBW Ol—
sifeo SOL oun ght

sind 00} yareW OL-
snd g6 eunr t+

SHED OO} YOTEW SI-
$729 OOF SUNT SE+

sind ¢6 yale Sz—
sind g6 eunr gz+

‘OL peaids

‘6 peaids

7g peeids

‘2 peaids

zi-6 eun6il4



--- 第 201 页 ---

Risk Considerations 197

Figure 9-13

30

254 spread 7

spread 8
(long put time spread)

(long call time spread)
20-
155

107

spread 9
| (diagonal put spread)

a

spread 10
(diagonal call spread)

Theoretical Profit & Loss

5.00 2.00 4.00 6.00 8.00 40.00 12.00
Interest Rate (%)

If volatility risk is our second concern, then spread 8 is probably best because its vega
divided by theoretical edge is much smaller than that of spread 10. Suppose, however,
that we are more concerned with a large move in the underlying stock than with a
decline in volatility. Now we can see that spread 10 1s best because its positive gamma
means that a large move in the price of the underlying stock can only work to our
advantage. As always, the choice of strategies will require us to make some judgements
as to what risks we are willing to accept, and to what degree.

Finally, let’s look at our spreads with respect to a change in dividends. In our
evaluation table we assumed a quarterly dividend of 1.25. Suppose we believe that the
dividend is likely to be increased. How will this affect our four spreads? From Figure
9-14 we can see that now spreads 7 and 9 look the best since they are helped by an
increase in the dividend.

What about volatility and curvature risk? Estimating the relative risks by dividing
the sensitivity by theoretical edge, we have:

Vega Risk Gamma Risk
Spread 7: 2.275/6.75 = 337 -32.5/6.75 = ~4.8
Spread 9: 1.985/6.50= 305 -3.5/6.50= -.5

Since there is not much difference in the spreads in terms of vega risk, we might
choose spread 9 since it has much less gamma risk. At the same time, if we believe an


--- 第 202 页 ---

192 Chapter 9

Figure 9-14
25
spread 8 spread 7

20 (long call time spread) (long put time spread)
g 15 ae _
a J oS
rs] spread 10
2 57 (diagonal call spread) Se spread 9
D “so (diagonal put spread)
[e] RS
£ -
£ o+—~ 7

54

-1 0 T T T T
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50

Quarterly Dividend

increase in the dividend is very likely, we may prefer spread 7, since we can see from
Figure 9-14 that if the dividend is increased, spread 7 shows the greatest increase in
value.

WHAT IS A GOOD SPREAD?

Option traders, being human, would rather talk about their successes than their
disasters. If one were to eavesdrop on conversations among traders, it would probably
seem that no one ever made a losing trade. Disasters, when they do occur, only happen
to other traders. The fact is every successful option trader has had his share of disasters.
What separates the successful trader from the unsuccessful one is the ability to survive
such occurrences.

Consider the trader who initiates a spread with a good theoretical edge and a large
margin for error in almost every risk category. If the trader still ends up losing money
on the spread, does this mean that the trader has made a poor choice of spreads? Maybe
a similar spread, but one with less margin for error, would have resulted in an even
greater loss, perhaps a loss from which the trader could not recover.

It is impossible to take into consideration every possible risk. A spread which passed
every risk test would probably have so little theoretical edge that it wouldn’t be worth
doing. But the trader who allows himself a reasonable margin for error will find that
even his losses will not lead to financial ruin. A good spread is not necessarily the one


--- 第 203 页 ---

Risk Considerations 193

that shows the greatest profit when things go well; it may be the one which shows the
least loss when things go badly. Winning trades always take care of themselves. Losing
trades, which don’t give back all the profits from the winning ones, are just as important.

ADJUSTMENTS

In the last chapter we considered the question of when a trader should adjust a position
to remain delta neutral. The trader must also consider how best to adjust, for there are
many different ways to adjust the total delta position. An adjustment to a trader’s delta
position may reduce his directional risk, but if he simultaneously increases his gamma,
theta, or vega risk, he may inadvertently be exchanging one type of risk for another.

A delta adjustment made with the underlying contract is essentially a risk neutral
adjustment. By this we mean that an adjustment made with the underlying contract
will not change any of the other risks we have discussed because the gamma, theta, and
vega associated with an underlying contract are zero. Therefore, if a trader wants to
adjust his delta position, but wants to leave the other characteristics of the position
unaffected, he can do so by purchasing or selling an appropriate number of underlying
contracts.

An adjustment made with options may reduce the delta risk, but will also change
the other risk characteristics associated with the position. Every option, in addition to
having a delta, also has a gamma, theta, and vega. When an option is added to or
subtracted from a position, it necessarily changes the total delta, gamma, theta, and vega
of the position. This is something which new traders sometimes forget.

Consider an option market where the underlying contract is trading at 99.25. If all
options appear to be overpriced, a trader might decide to sell the 95/105 strangle (sell
the 95 put, sell the 105 call). Suppose the deltas of the put and call are, respectively,
—36 and +36, and the trader decides to sell 20 strangles. He is initially delta neutral
since

(+20 x -36) + (-20 x +36) = 0

Suppose several days pass and the underlying market has fallen to 97.00, with new
delta values for the 95 put and 105 call of —41 and +30. Assuming that no adjustments
have been made, the trader’s delta position is now

(-20 x —41) + (-20 x +30) = +220
If the trader now decides to make an adjustment he has three basic choices:

1. sell underlying contracts

2. sell calls
3. buy puts
Which method is best?

All other considerations being equal, whenever a trader makes an adjustment he
should do so with the intention of improving the risk/reward characteristics of the


--- 第 204 页 ---

194 Chapter 9

position. If the trader decides to adjust his delta position by purchasing puts, he also
reduces his other risks since the gamma, theta, and vega associated with the put
purchase are opposite in sign to the gamma, theta, and vega associated with his existing
short strangle position.

Unfortunately, all other considerations may not be equal. Since implied volatility
can remain high or low for long periods of time, it is quite likely that if all options were
overpriced when the trader Initiated his position, they will still be overpriced when he
goes back into the market to make his adjustment. Even though the purchase of puts to
become delta neutral will reduce his other risks, such an adjustment will also have the
effect of reducing the theoretical edge. On the other hand, if all options are overpriced
and the trader decides to sell additional calls to reduce the delta, the sale of the
overpriced calls will have the effect of increasing the theoretical edge. If the trader
decides that adding to his theoretical edge is of primary importance he may decide to
sell seven more 105 calls, leaving him approximately delta neutral since

(-20 x 41) + (-27 x +30) = +10

Now suppose several more days pass and the market has rebounded to 101.50,
with new delta values for the 95 put and 105 cali of -26 and +40. The position delta
is now

(-20 x -26) + (-27 x +40) = -560

Again, if the trader wants to adjust he is faced with three choices: buy underlying
contracts, buy calls, or sell puts. Assuming that all options are still overpriced and that
the trader wants to continue to increase his theoretical edge, he may decide to sell an
additional 22 of the 95 puts. The total delta position is

(-42 x -26) + (-27 x +40) = +12

Tt should be clear what will result from these adjustments. If all options remain
overpriced and the trader is always intent on increasing his theoretical edge, he will
continue to make whatever adjustments are necessary by continuously selling over-
priced options. This method of adjusting may indeed result in the greatest profit to the
trader. But notice what is happening. The strangle, which the trader was initially
prepared to sell 20 times, has now increased in size to 42 x 27, If the market now makes
a violent move in either direction, the negative consequences will be greatly magnified.
Unfortunately, the new trader, overly concerned with always increasing his theoretical
edge, often finds himself in just such a position. If the market makes a very swift move,
the trader may not survive, For this reason, a new trader who is unfamiliar with all the
subtleties of an option market should avoid making adjustments which increase the size
of his position.

No trader can afford to ignore the effect his adjustments will have on the total risk
to his position. If he has a positive (negative) gamma position, buying (selling) any
additional options will increase his gamma risk. Likewise, if he has a positive (negative)
vega position, buying (selling) any additional options will increase his vega risk. A trader
cannot afford to sell overpriced options or buy underpriced options ad infinitum. At


--- 第 205 页 ---

Risk Considerations 195

some point the size of the spread will simply become too large, and any additional
theoretical edge will have to take a back seat to risk considerations. When that happens
there are only two choices: decrease the size of the spread or adjust in the underlying
market.

A disciplined trader knows that sometimes, because of risk considerations, the best
course is to reduce the size of the spread, even if it means giving up some theoretical
edge. This may be hard on the trader's ego, particularly if he must personally go back
into the market and either buy back options which he originally sold at a lower price,
or sell out options which he originally purchased at a higher price. However, if a trader
is unwilling to swallow his pride from time to time, and admit that he made a mistake,
his trading career is certain to be a short one.

Ifa trader finds that any delta adjustment in the option market that reduces his risk
will also reduce his theoretical edge, and he is unwilling to give up any theoretical edge,
his only recourse is to make his adjustments in the underlying market. An underlying
contract has no gamma, theta, or vega, so the risks of the position will remain essentially
the same.

A QUESTION OF STYLE

Because most option pricing models assume that movement in the underlying contract
is random, an option trader who trades purely from the theoretical values generated by
a model should not have any prior opinion about the direction in which the underlying
market will move. In practice, however, many option traders begin their trading careers
by taking positions in the underlying market, where direction is the primary considera-
tion. Many traders therefore develop a style of trading based on presumed directional
moves in the underlying market. A trader might, for example, be a trend follower,
adhering to the philosophy that “the trend is your friend.” Or he might be a contrarian,
preferring to “buy weakness, sell strength.”

Traders often try to incorporate their personal trading styles into their option
strategies. One way to do this is to consider beforehand the adjustments which will be
required for a certain strategy if the underlying market begins to move. For example,
suppose a trader sells straddles in such a way that he is initially delta neutral. Such
spreads have a negative gamma, so that as the market moves higher his delta position
is getting shorter, and as the market moves lower his delta position is getting longer. If
this trader likes to trade against the trend, he will avoid adjustments as much as possible
because his position is automatically trading against the trend. Whichever way the
market moves, the position always wants a retracement of this movement.

On the other hand, a trader who sells the same straddles but prefers to trade with
the trend will adjust at every opportunity. In order to remain delta neutral, he will be
forced to buy underlying contracts as the market rises and sell underlying contracts as
the market falls.

The opposite is true for a trader who buys straddles. He has a positive gamma
Position, so that as the market rises his delta is becoming longer, and as the market falls
his delta is becoming shorter. If this trader likes to trade with the trend, he will want to


--- 第 206 页 ---

196 Chapter 9

adjust as little is possible in the belief that the market is likely to continue in the same
direction. However, if he prefers to trade against the trend, he will want to adjust as
often as possible. Every adjustment will represent a profit opportunity if the market does
in fact reverse direction.

A trader with a negative gamma is always adjusting with the trend of the
underlying market. A trader with a positive gamma is always adjusting against the
trend of the underlying marked. If a trader prefers to trade with the trend or against the
trend, he should choose a strategy and an adjustment process that is appropriate to his
preference. A trader who prefers to trade with the trend can choose a strategy with a
positive gamma together with less frequent adjustments, or a strategy with a negative
gamma with more frequent adjustments. A trader who prefers to trade against the trend
can choose a strategy with a negative gamma together with less frequent adjustments,
or a strategy with a positive gamma with more frequent adjustments. The purely
theoretical trader will not have to worry about this since for him there is no such thing
as a trend. However, for most traders old habits, such as trading with or against the
trend, die hard.

LIQUIDITY

As long as a trader has an open option position it represents a risk. Even if the risk is
limited to the current value of the options, by leaving the position open the trader is
Tisking the loss of that value. If he wants to eliminate the risk, he will have to take some
action which will in effect close out the position. Sometimes this can be done through
early exercise, or by taking advantage of an opposing position to create an arbitrage.
More often, however, in order to close out an open position a trader will be required
go into the marketplace and buy in any short options and sell out any long options.

An important consideration in deciding whether to enter into a trade is often the
ease with which the trader can reverse the trade. Liquid option markets, where there
are many buyers and sellers, are much less risky than illiquid markets, where there are
few buyers and sellers. In the same way, a spread which consists of very liquid options
is much less risky than a spread which consists of one or more illiquid options. If a trader
is considering entering into a spread where the options are illiquid, he ought to ask
himself whether he is willing to live with that position until expiration. If the market is
very illiquid, that may be the only time he will be able to get out of the position at
anything resembling a fair price. If the spread consists of long-term options, say nine
months, the trader may find himself married to the position for better or worse, in
sickness and in health, for the next nine months. If he is unwilling to commit his capital
for that period, perhaps he should avoid the position. Since there is greater risk
associated with a long-term investment than with a short-term investment, a trader who
does decide to take a position in long-term options ought to expect greater potential
profit in the form of larger theoretical edge.

New traders are often advised to begin trading in liquid markets. If a new trader
does make an error resulting in a losing trade, in a liquid market he will be able to keep
his loss to a minimum because he will be able to exit the trade with relative ease. On


--- 第 207 页 ---

Risk Considerations 197

the other hand, an experienced trader, especially a market maker, will often prefer to
deal in less liquid markets. There may be less trading activity in such markets, but the
bid/ask spread is much wider, resulting in greater theoretical edge each time a trade is
made. Of course, any mistake can be a problem with which the trader will have to live
for a long time. However, an experienced trader is expected to keep his mistakes to a
minimum.

The most liquid options in any market are those which are short-term and which
are either at- or slightly out-of-the-money. Such options always have the narrowest
bid/ask spread, and there are usually traders willing to buy or sell large numbers of these
contracts. As a trader moves to longer term options, or to options which are more deeply
in-the-money, he finds that the bid/ask spread begins to widen, and there are fewer and
fewer traders interested in these contracts. While at-the-money short-term options are
constantly traded, deeply in-the-money long-term options may not trade for weeks at a
time.

In addition to the liquidity of an option market, a trader should also give some
thought to the liquidity of the underlying market. If a trader has an option position and
wants to make an adjustment, he may find it difficult to do if the option market is
illiquid. If the underlying market is liquid, he will at least he be able to make his
adjustment in that market with relative ease. The most dangerous market in which to
trade is one where both the options and the underlying contract are inactively traded.
Only the most experienced and knowledgeable traders should enter such markets.

End-of-day volume figures and bid/ask spreads in S&P 500 index options traded at
the Chicago Board Options Exchange on July 9, 1993 are shown in Figure 9-15. Note
the lower volume and wider bid/ask spread for back month and deeply in-the-money
options, versus front month and at- and out-of-the-money options.


--- 第 208 页 ---

Chapter 9

08

0
aUIN|OA

198

Yep

6

%9
Ut)

pb

Wve

Bunsy ou
Buys ou
Bunsi ou
Burst] ou
var
Buysi ou
Buysy ou
Buys ou
%9
MG

Buysi ou
Bugsiy ou
Buysi| ou
Buys ou
Mp
Buysi| ou
Buysi ou
“EY
Bunsi| ou
6c
ZA Se

om ooeooeosod

get
S2Z'}

02s
008

OL

ses
1
Ze
9b

I

ie)
aoe
OL

0
BUIN|OA

Wee
vt
Srl
Melb

%, Z
"eS

w%E
ard
eb

wz
x \e
%G
th
#1
Yet
“Hee
“92
te
4Sv

suondo sequiaydeg

ALS
ALL
tAbL
iL
Ag
As]
Ae

%e
SAL

WE

% Z
301
MEL
S4L1
Ale
“SS
0g
Pid

) 7a %0Z 0
) Lb Lt )
9 yer SASh ez
vel %6 %6 OL
Ogl ZL %9 22s" }
019 Sey “Ay eer'h
Se6 Se Ze 96 2'2
00s %e He 0e2't
eer'l %1 lh ze6
os Seb 1 z
) 1 et ele
OL oy 9 “G fe)
oes %&% Ht 69p
2st el %h 108
sch ME ed 00s
992 86S AS eL0'L
os *”AB %eb 266
Gor'z NA ett zes'2
) a %Gt sce
0 *402 %6t 0
0) YSZ Ave 0
) %A6e *A8Z 0
auinjoA 4sSYv Pla sUuNn|oOA
suondo ysnfiny

suondo Ain

Het
VAS
849
Ee
OLA
%4
4
%
%
Sly

oly

gL ‘A
%

9 yy
% 1
Yep
ae

bh
"481
“Ase
%%gz
4SV

Ale
%9l
Yebh
%9
we
t
%
%
oly
oY,

cA
6
aL
Sep
%g
wel
8h
“jee
Sle
Pld

ind ol¢
ind S94
ind ogy
ind gy
ind osr
ind Spr
ind Opp
ind sey
ind OEy
ynd sep
ind oz

Ire9 Ob
Ire0 Sop
Ire9 09%
reo SSP
3 OSp
Teo Spb
(29 OPP
IlB0 Sey
ITE2 OF
ITeo Sep
leo Oz

Li Sbp ye xepu] 00S dks
(300) suondo xepuy Gos aes C66! ‘6 Aine

S1-6 ounBi4


--- 第 209 页 ---

“ 10 &
Bull and Bear Spreads

While delta neutral strategies are perhaps the most popular among active option traders,
many traders prefer to trade with a bullish or bearish perspective in the underlying
instrument. The trader who wishes to take a directional position in the underlying
instrument has the choice of doing so in either the instrument itself, buying or selling a
futures contract or stock, or in the option market. If he chooses the option market, the
trader has the opportunity to integrate option pricing theory into a bull or bear strategy
in order to take advantage of theoretically mispriced options.

NAKED POSITIONS

Since the purchase of calls or the sale of puts will create a positive delta position, and
the sale of calls or purchase of puts will create a negative delta position, we can always
take a directional position in a market by taking an appropriate naked position in either
calls or puts. If all options are overpriced (high implied volatility), we might sell puts to
create a bullish position, or sell calls to create a bearish position. If all options are
underpriced (low implied volatility], we might buy calls to create a bullish position, or
buy puts to create a bearish position.

The problem with this approach is that, as with all non-hedged positions, there is
very little margin for error. If we purchase options, we will lose money not only if the
market moves in the wrong direction, but also if the market fails to move enough in our
favor to offset the time premium in the option. If we sell options, we face the prospect
of unlimited risk if the market moves violently against us. An experienced trader will
always look for a way to improve the risk/reward characteristics of his position by
looking for positions with the greatest possible margin for error. This philosophy applies
no less to directional strategies than to volatility strategies. In directional strategies, as
in volatility strategies, this can often be done by finding an appropriate spread.

BULL AND BEAR RATIO SPREADS

If a trader believes that implied volatility is too high, one sensible strategy is a ratio
vertical spread. For example, with the underlying market at 100 suppose a June 100
call has a delta of 50 and a June 110 call has a delta of 25. A delta neutral spreader can:

buy 1 June 100 call (50)
sell 2 June 110 calls (25)

199


--- 第 210 页 ---

200 Chapter 10

Since the spread is delta neutral, it has no particular preference for upward or downward
movement in the underlying market.

Now suppose the same trader believes that this ratio vertical spread is a sensible
strategy, but at the same time he is also bullish on the market. There is no law that
requires him to do this spread in a delta neutral ratio. If he wants this spread to reflect
his bullish sentiment, he might change the ratio slightly:

buy 2 June 100 calls (50)
sell 3 June 110 calls (25)

The trader has essentially the same ratio vertical spread, but with a bullish bias. This is
reflected in the total delta for the position of +25.

There is, however, an important limitation using this type of ratio strategy to create
a bullish or bearish position. In our example the trader is initially bullish, but the position
is still a ratio vertical spread. As such, it has a negative gamma. If the trader has
underestimated volatility, and the underlying market moves up too quickly, the spread
can invert from a positive to a negative delta. If the market rises far enough, to 130 or
140, eventually all options will go deeply into-the-money and the deltas of both the June
100 and June 110 calls will approach 100. Eventually, the trader will be left with a delta
position of -100. Even though the trader was correct in his bullish sentiment, the
position was primarily a volatility spread, so that the volatility characteristics of the
position eventually outweighed any considerations of market direction.

The delta can also invert with a backspread. Unlike a negative gamma position,
where the inversion is caused by swift price movement in the underlying contract, a
backspread can invert when the market is less volatile than expected. For example,
suppose that with the underlying market at 100 a trader believes that implied volatility
is too low. He might decide on a delta neutral backspread:

buy 2 June 110 calls (25)
sell 1 June 100 call (50)

If, however, he is bullish on the market, he can, as in the last example, change the
ratio to reflect this sentiment:

buy 3 June 110 calls (25)
sell 1 June 100 call (50)

His delta position of +25 reflects this bullish bias.

We know that as time passes, or as volatility declines, all deltas move away from
50. If time begins to pass with no movement in the underlying contract, the delta of the
June 100 call will remain at 50, but the delta of the June 110 call will start to decline.
If, after a period of time, the delta of the June 100 call declines to 10, the delta of the
position will no longer be +25, but will instead be -20, Since this spread is a volatility
spread, the primary consideration, as before, is the volatility of the market. Only
secondarily are we concerned with the direction of movement. If the trader overesti-
mates volatility, and the market moves more slowly than expected, the spread which
was initially delta positive can instead become delta negative.


--- 第 211 页 ---

Bull and Bear Spreads 201

BULL AND BEAR BUTTERFLIES AND TIME SPREADS

Butterflies and one-to-one (non-ratioed) time spreads can also be chosen in such a way
as to reflect a trader’s bullish or bearish bias. Like ratio spreads, however, their delta
characteristics can also invert as market conditions change.

With the underlying market at 100, a delta neutral trader might buy the June
95/100/105 call butterfly (buy a 95 call, sell two 100 calls, buy a 105 call). The trader
hopes that the market will sit still at 100 so that at expiration the butterfly will widen
to its maximum value of five points. If, however, a trader wants to buy a butterfly, but
js also bullish on the market, he can choose a butterfly where the inside exercise price
is above the current price of the underlying contract. If the underlying market is
currently at 100, he might choose to buy the June 105/110/115 call butterfly. Since
this position wants the underlying market at 110 at expiration, and itis currently at 100,
the position is a bull butterfly. This will be reflected in the position having a positive
delta.

Unfortunately, if the underlying market moves too swiftly, say to 120, the butterfly
can invert from a positive to a negative delta position. Since at expiration the butterfly
always has its maximum value with the underlying contract right at the inside exercise
price, the trader will now want the market to fall back from 120 to 110. Whenever the
underlying market is below 110, the position will be bullish; whenever the underlying
market is above 110, the position will be bearish.

Conversely, if the trader is bearish, he can always choose to buy a butterfly where
the inside exercise price is below the current price of the underlying market. But again,
if the market moves down too quickly and goes through the inside exercise price, the
position will invert from a negative to a positive delta.

In a similar manner, a trader can choose time spreads that are either bullish or
bearish. A long time spread always wants the near-term contract to expire exactly
at-the-money. A long time spread will be initially bullish if the exercise price of the time
spread is above the current price of the underlying market.! With the underlying market
at 100, the June/March 110 call time spread (buy the June 110 call/sell the March 110
call} will be bullish since the trader will want the underlying market to rise to 110 by
March expiration. The June/March 90 call time spread (buy the June 90 call/sell the
March 90 call) will be bearish, since the trader will want the underlying market to fall
to 90 by March expiration. However, like a long butterfly, a long time spread has a
negative gamma, so that if the market moves through the exercise price, the delta can
invert. If the market moves from 100 to 120, the June/March 110 call time spread,
which was initially bullish, will become bearish. If the market moves from 100 to 80,
the June/March 90 call time spread, which was initially bearish, will become bullish.

1. In the futures market the situation may be complicated by the fact that different futures months may
be trading at different prices. Instead of choosing a traditional time spread where both options have the
same exercise price, the trader may have to choose a diagonal spread to ensure that the position {s either
bullish (delta positive) or bearish (delta negative).


--- 第 212 页 ---

202 Chapter 10

VERTICAL SPREADS

It is common for traders to take bull or bear market positions by choosing appropriate
ratio spreads, butterflies, or time spreads, but in each of these positions volatility is still
the primary concern. A trader can be right about market direction, but if he is wrong
about volatility, the spread may not retain the directional characteristics that the trader
intended.

If a trader focuses initially on the direction of the underlying market, he might look
for a spread where the directional characteristics of the spread are the primary concern,
and volatility is of secondary importance. He would like to be certain that if the spread
is initially bullish (delta positive) it will remain bullish under all possible market
conditions. If it is initially bearish (delta negative) it will remain bearish under all
possible market conditions.

The class of spreads which meet the above requirements are known as vertical
spreads. A vertical spread always consists of one long (purchased) option and one short
(sold) option, where both options are of the same type (either hoth calls or both puts)
and expire at the same time. The options are distinguished only by their different
exercise prices. Typical vertical spreads might be:

buy 1 June 100 call
sell 1 June 105 call

or

buy 1 March 105 put
sell 1 March 95 put

Vertical spreads are not only initially bullish or bearish, but they remain bullish or
bearish no matter how market conditions change. Two options which have different
exercise prices but which are identical in every other respect cannot have identical
deltas. In the first example, where the trader is long a June 100 call and short a June
105 call, the June 100 call will always have a delta greater than the June 105 call. If
both options go deeply into-the-money or very far out-of-the-money, the deltas may be
almost identical. Even then, the June 100 call will have a delta fractionally greater than
the June 105 call. In the second example, no matter how market conditions change,
the March 105 put will always have a delta greater than the March 95 put.

At expiration, a vertical spread will have a minimum value of zero, if both options
are out-of-the-money, and a maximum value of the amount between exercise prices, if
both options are in-the-money. If the underlying market is below 100 at expiration, the
June 100/105 call spread will be worthless because both options will be worthless. If
the market is above 105, the same spread will be worth five points because the June
100 call will be worth exactly five points more than the June 105 call. Similarly, the
March 95/105 put spread will be worthless if the underlying market is above 105 at
expiration, and it will be worth 10 points if the market is below 95. The expiration
values of typical bull and bear vertical spreads are shown in Figures 10-1 and 10-2.


--- 第 213 页 ---

Bull and Bear Spreads

203

Figure 10-1

sell a call (put)
at a higher
exercise price
od
é
=
oa
)
n
o
—
~«
buy a call (put)
at a lower
exercise price
Figure 10-2
sell a call (put)
at a lower
exercise price
—_———_—_.___
#
=
2
a
g
pa
————<—___———_—_—_—§_—_¥_ i
buy a calf (put)
at a higher
exercise price



--- 第 214 页 ---

204 Chapter 10

Since a vertical spread at expiration will always have a value hetween zero and the
amount between exercise prices, a trader can expect the price of such a spread to be
somewhere within this range. A 100/105 call vertical spread will trade for some
amount between zero and five points; a 95/105 put vertical spread will trade for some
amount between zero and 10 points. The exact value will depend on the likelihood of
the underlying market finishing below the lower exercise price, above the higher
exercise price, or somewhere in between. If the market is currently at 80 and gives little
indication of rising, the price of the 100/105 call vertical will be close to zero, while
the price of the 95/105 puts vertical will be close to 10. If the market is currently at
120 with little likelihood that it will fall, the price of the 100/105 call vertical will be
close to five points, while the price of the 95/105 put vertical will be close to zero.

If a trader wants to do a vertical spread, he has essentially four choices. If he is
bullish he can choose a bull vertical call spread or a bull vertical put spread; if he is
bearish he can choose a bear vertical call spread or a bear vertical put spread. For
example:

bull call spread: buy a June 100 call
sell a June 105 call
bull put spread: buy a June 100 put
sell a June 105 put
bear call spread: sell a June 100 call
buy a June 105 call
bear put spread: sell a June 100 put

buy a June 105 put

Note that a trader who is bullish can buy a 100 call and sell a 105 call, or buy a
100 put and sell a 105 put. And a trader who is bearish can buy a 105 call and sell a
100 call, or buy a 105 put and sell 100 put. This may seem counter-intuitive, since one
expects spreads which consist of puts to have characteristics which are the opposite of
those which consist of calls. Regardless of whether a vertical spread consists of calls or
puts, whenever a trader buys the lower exercise price and sells the higher exercise
price, the position is bullish; whenever a trader buys the higher exercise price and sells
the lower exercise price, the position is bearish. Call and put vertical spreads which
expire at the same time and which consist of the same exercise prices have approxi-
mately the same delta, so they have approximately the same bullish or bearish charac-
teristics.

Given the many different exercise prices and expiration months available, how can
a trader choose the vertical spread which best reflects his directional expectations and
which gives him the best chance to profit from those expectations?

Since options have a limited life with a fixed expiration date, a trader who wants
to use options to take advantage of an expected market move must first determine his
time horizon. Is the movement likely to occur in the next month, in the next three
months, in the next nine months? If it is currently May and the trader foresees upward

2. Weare assuming for the moment that all options are European, with no possibility of early exercise.


--- 第 215 页 ---

Bull and Bear Spreads 205

movement, but helieves the movement is unlikely to occur within the next two months,
it does not make much sense to take a position in June options. If his expectations are
long-term, he may have to take his position in September, or even December, options.
Of course, as he moves further and further out in time, market liquidity may become
more of a problem. This is a factor that will have to taken into consideration.

Next, a trader will have to decide just how bullish or bearish he is. Is he very
confident, and therefore willing to take a very large directional position? Or is he less
certain and willing to take only a limited position? Two factors determine the total
directional characteristics of a vertical spread:

1, The delta of the specific vertical spread
2. The size in which the spread is executed

For example, a trader who wants to take a position which is 500 deltas long
(equivalent to purchasing five underlying contracts) can either choose a vertical spread
which is 50 deltas Jong and execute it 10 times, or choose a vertical spread which is 25
deltas long and execute it 20 times. Both positions will leave him long 500 deltas.

The delta value of a vertical spread is determined by various factors: time to
expiration, volatility, and distance between exercise prices. Since a trader will be
required to choose an expiration date which covers the period of expected directional
movement, and since a trader will always make his best estimate of volatility over a
given period, in practice the delta will be a function of the exercise prices which he
chooses. The greater the distance between exercise prices, the greater the delta value
associated with the spread. A 95/110 bull spread will be more bullish than a 100/110
bull spread, which will, in turn, be more bullish than a 100/105 bull spread. This is
shown in Figure 10-3.

Once a trader decides on an expiration month in which to take his directional
position, he must decide which specific spread is best. That is, he must decide which
exercise prices to use. A common approach is to focus on the at-the-money options. If
a trader does this, he will have the following choices:

Bull call spread: buyanin-the-money call or buy an atthe-money call

sell an at-the-money cal! sell an out-of-the-money
Bear call spread: buy anat-the-money call! or buy an out-of-the-money call

sell an in-the-money call sell an at-the-money call
Bull put spread: buyanat-the-moneyput or buy an out-of-the-money put

sell an in-the-money put sell an at-the-money put
Bear put spread: buy anin-the-money put or buy an at-the-money put

sell an at-the-money put sell an out-of-the-money put

With four different bull spreads and four different bear spreads available, how can
the trader choose the spread which represents the hest value? One way to do this is to
use a theoretical pricing model to evaluate several different vertical spreads. This has
been done in Figure 10-4 for six different options on an underlying futures contract: an
in-the-money, at-the-money, and out-of-the-money call, and an in-the-money, at-the-


--- 第 216 页 ---

206

Chapter 10
Figure 10-3
As the exercise prices become further
apart, a vertical spread takes on
greater bullish or bearish characteristics. oe
~ _ >
7 f _
é
4+ _ f{——~ JL _
slightly bullish é
Z
moderately bullish /
~_| - te f
very bullish
+

money, and out-of-the-money put. The assumptions include an underlying price of 100,
12 weeks to expiration, a volatility estimate of 20%, and an interest rate of 8%.

Suppose we are interested in doing a bull call spread. Two possibilities are to buy
a 95 call and sell a 100 call, or buy a 100 call and sell a 105 call. The spreads and their
theoretical values are:

Spread Theoretical Value Delta
95/100 call spread 2.87 +20
100/105 call spread 1.88 +20
Figure 10-4
Futures price = 100; Time = 12 weeks; Volatility = 20%; Interest = 8.00%

Theoretical
Option Value Delta Gamma Theta Vega
95 call 6.63 71 3.4 —.017 16
100 call 3.76 §1 41 —.022 .19
105 call 1.88 31 3.7 —.020 17
95 put 1.72 -27 3.4 -.019 16
100 put 3.76 -47 41 —.022 19

105 put , 6.79 -67 3.7 -.019 A7


--- 第 217 页 ---

Buil and Bear Spreads 207

With both spreads having the same delta of +20, it may appear that the 100/105 spread
is a better value since it is likely to be less expensive. But should this be the sole
determinant in choosing a strategy? As in all spreads, the option trader’s goal is to create
a position with positive theoretical edge, by either purchasing high value at a low price,
or selling low value at a high price. In order to achieve this goal we need to know not
only the theoretical values of the spreads, but also the prices of the spreads in the
marketplace.

From an option trader’s point of view, the relative prices of options in the
marketplace is usually represented by the implied volatility. We know the value of the
spreads based on our volatility input of 20%. What might be the prices of the spreads if
implied volatility in the option market is something other than 20%? We can answer
the question by using a theoretical pricing model with the same underlying price, time
to expiration, and interest rate, but with volatilities lower and higher than 20%. This
has been done in Figure 10-5 using volatilities of 16% and 24%, along with our estimated
volatility of 20%.

Going back to our bull call spread, suppose implied volatility is lower than our
estimate of 20%, say 16%. We can see that the price of the 95/100 spread will be
approximately 3.01, while the price of the 100/105 spread will be approximately 1.78.
We have two choices: we can pay 3.01 for a spread that is worth 2.87 (the 95/100
spread), or we can pay 1.78 for a spread that is worth 1.88 (the 100/105 spread].
Clearly, we will prefer the 100/105 spread since it will result in a positive theoretical
edge of .10. If we were to buy the 95/100 spread we would end up with a negative
theoretical edge of .14.

Now suppose implied volatility is higher than our estimate of 20%, say 24%. We
can see that the price of the 95/100 spread will be approximately 2.77, while the price
of the 100/105 spread will be approximately 1.94. Again, we have two choices: we can
pay 2.77 for a spread that is worth 2.87 (the 95/100 spread), or we can pay 1.94 fora
spread that is worth 1.88 (the 100/105 spread). Now we will prefer the 95/100 spread
since it will result ina positive theoretical edge of .10. The 100/105 spread would result
in a negative theoretical edge of .06.

Figure 10-5
95 95/100 100 100/105 105
Volatility Cali Spread Call Spread Call
16% 6.02 3.01 3.01 1.78 1.23
20% 6.63 (71) 2.87 (20) 3.76 (51) 1.88 (20) 2.57 (31)
24% 7.28 2.77 4.51 1.94 2.57
95 95/100 100 100/105 105
Volatility Put Spread Put Spread Put
16% 1.11 1.90 3.01 3.13 6.14
20% 1.72 (-27} 2.04 (20) 3.76 (47) 3.03 (20) 6.79 (-87)

24% 2.37 2.14 4.51 2.97 7.48


--- 第 218 页 ---

208 Chapter 10

What’s happening here? Even though both spreads have the same delta values,
under one set of circumstances we seem to prefer the 95/100 spread, while under
different circumstances we seem to prefer the 100/105 spread. The reason becomes
Clear if we recall one of the characteristics of option evaluation introduced in Chapter 6:

If we consider three options, an in-the-money, at-the-money, and out-of-
the-money option which are identical except for their exercise prices, the
at-the-money option is always the most sensitive in total points to a change
in volatility.

This means that when all options appear overpriced because we believe implied
volatility is too high, in total points the at-the-money option will be the most overpriced.
When all options appear underpriced because we believe implied volatility is too low,
in total points the at-the-money option will be the most underpriced. This characteristic
leads to a very simple rule for choosing bull and bear vertical spreads:

Jfimplied volatility ts too low, vertical spreads should focus on purchasing
the at-the-money option. If implied volatility is too high, vertical spreads
should focus on selling the at-the-money options.

Now we can see why the 100/105 call spread is a better value if implied volatility
is 16%, while the 95/100 spread is a better value if implied volatility is 24%. If implied
volatility is too low (16%), we want to buy the at-the-money (100) call. Having done
this, we have only one choice in order to create a bull spread—sell the out-of-the-money
(105) call. If implied volatility is too high (24%), we want to sell the at-the-money (100}
call. Having done this, we again have only one choice in order to create a bull
spread—buy the in-the-money (95) call.

The same principle is equally true for put vertical spreads. We always want to focus
on the at-the-money option, buying it when implied volatility is too low, and selling it
when implied volatility is too high. For example, suppose we want to do a bear put
spread with implied volatility too low. In this case we want to buy the at-the-money
(100) put. Having done this, we are forced to sell the out-of-the-money (95) put to create
our bear spread. We can see from Figure 10-5 that we will pay approximately 1.90 for
this spread, but the spread is worth 2.04, We will end up with a delta position of -20,
and a positive theoretical edge of .14.

Of course, a trader is not required to execute any vertical spread by first buying or
selling the at-the-money option. Such spreads always involve two options, and a trader
can choose to either execute the complete spread in one transaction, or leg into the
spread by trading one option at a time. In the latter case, he may decide to first trade
the in-the-money or out-of-the-money option, and trade the at-the-money option at a
later time. This is a practical trading decision he will have to make based on market
conditions and the amount of risk he is willing to accept. Regardless of how the spread
is executed, the trader should focus on the at-the-money option, either buying it when
implied volatility is too low, or selling it when implied volatility is too high.

In practice itis unlikely that one option will be exactly at-the-money, so that it may
be difficult to decide which option to buy and which to sell. In sucha case, it is usually


--- 第 219 页 ---

Bull and Bear Spreads 209

best to focus on the option which is closest to at-the-money. If the underlying market is
at 103, with 95, 100, 105, and 110 calls available, it is logical to focus on the 105 call
since it is closest to at-the-money. If implied volatility is too low, a trader will want to
buy the 105 call; if implied volatility is too high, a trader will want to sell the 105 call.
He can then trade a different option in order to create a bull or bear vertical spread.

Nor does a trader have to include the option which is closest-to-the- money as part
of his spread. A trader who has a strong directional opinion can choose a vertical spread
where both options are very far out-of-the-money or very deeply in-the-money. The delta
values of such spreads will be very low, but a trader can create a highly leveraged
position by executing each spread many times. For example, with the underlying market
at 100, a trader who is strongly bullish might buy the 115/120 call spread (assuming
such exercise prices are available). The cost of this spread will be very low since there
is a high probability that the spread will expire worthless. Hence, the trader will be able
to execute the spread many times at a relatively low cost. If he is right and the market
does rise above 120, the spread will widen to its maximum value of five points, resulting
in very large profits. But regardless of the exercise prices chosen, if implied volatility is
low, the trader will attempt to buy the closer-to-the-money option, and if implied
volatility is high, the trader will attempt to sell the closer-to-the-money option.

The choice of the at-the-money option is slightly different when we move to stock
options. If we define the at-the-money option as the one whose delta is closest to 50,
then we may find that the at-the-money option is not always the one whose exercise
price is closest to the current price of the underlying contract. This is because the option
with a delta closest to 50 will be the one whose exercise price is closest to the forward
price of the underlying contract. In stock options, the forward price is the current price
of the stock, plus carrying costs on the stock, less expected dividends. Assuming an
underlying stock price of 99, six months to expiration, a volatility of 28%, interest rates
of 10%, and no dividend, we can see from Figure 10-6 that the 105 call has a delta of
50 and therefore acts like the at-the-money option, even though its exercise price is six
points higher than the current underlying price. Therefore, any vertical spread should
focus on the 105 call or 105 put.

The approximate prices of vertical spreads with these stock options at implied
volatilities of 23% and 33% are shown in Figure 10-7.

Figure 10-6
Stock price = 99; Time = 6 months; Volatility = 28%; Interest = 8.00%
Theoretical
Option Value Delta Gamma Theta Vega
95 call 11.97 69 1.8 —.031 .24
105 call 6.96 50 2.0 —.030 27
115 call 3.74 32 1.8 -.025 25
95 put 4.25 -31 1.8 ~.013 .22
105 put 9.20 ~50 2.0 —.011 +26

115 put 15.68 -68 1.8 -.004 .24


--- 第 220 页 ---

210 Chapter 10

Figure 10-7
95 95/105 105 105/415 415
Volatility Call Spread Call Spread Call
23% 10.77 §.20 §.57 3.05 2.52
28% 11.97 (69) §.01 (19) 6,96 (50) 3.22 (18) 3.74 (32)
33% 13.21 4.85 8.36 3.34 5.02
95 95/105 105 105115 115
Volatility Call Spread Call Spread Cail
23% 3.05 441 7.46 6.56 14,02
28% 4.25 (-31) 4.60 (19) 8.85 (—50) 6.39 (19) 15.24 (68)
33% §.49 4.76 10.25 6.27 16.52

As always, we can never be certain of the delta values of a spread because we can
never be certain that we have the correct inputs into the model, in particular, volatility.
If volatility turns out to be lower than our estimate, the deltas will move away from 50.
If volatility turns out to be higher than our estimate, the deltas will move towards 50.
This will change the delta values of the spreads. However, if we work around the
at-the-money option, spreads with approximately the same amount between exercise
prices will have approximately the same delta values. Our primary problem will be
deciding whether implied volatility is too high or too low.

Notice that in every case, whether with futures options or with stock options,
whether using a low volatility ora high volatility, if one leg of our spread always involves
an at-the-money option, the vertical spread which includes the in-the-money option
always has a higher price than the spread which includes the out-of-the-money option.
Anew trader might take the view that since both spreads have approximately the same
delta values, it must make sense to always purchase the cheaper spread or sell the more
expensive. This ignores the purpose of option evaluation: to consider not only the initial
cost of a strategy, but to compare that to the strategy’s expected return. In our futures
option example, a trader will always have to pay more for the 95/100 call spread than
the 100/105 call spread. But if implied volatility is too high, the 95/100 spread will
also return more to the trader. To see why, suppose a trader is choosing between the
95/100 bull call spread and the 100/105 bull call spread. Consider three possible cases.
In case one, the trader is right and the market moves from 100 to 110. If that happens
both spreads will be winners since they will both widen to their maximum value of five
points. In case two, the trader is wrong and the market drops to 90. In that case both
spreads will be losers since they will both collapse to zero. Now consider case three,
where the trader is wrong because he expected the underlying market to rise and it
didn’t. But he wasn’t terribly wrong, because it also didn’t fall. It simply remained at
100. If that happens the 100/105 spread will collapse to zero, while the 95/100 spread
will stil! widen to its maximum value of five points. The 95/100 spread is always more
valuable than the 100/105 spread because it has time on its side. The 100/105 spread
needs the market to rise to show a profit. The 95/100 spread doesn’t really need the


--- 第 221 页 ---

Bull and Bear Spreads 211

market to rise; it just needs for the market not to fall. The reader can confirm this by
calculating the gamma and theta positions of the spreads in Figure 10-5. The 100/105
spread has a positive gamma and a negative theta, whereas the 95/100 spread has
negative gamma and a positive theta.

If a trader is considering a Dull vertical spread, how likely is it that the market will
rise? That depends on his ability to predict market direction. At the same time, he must
ask himself how likely it is that the market will move. That depends on his ability to
predict volatility. If a trader believes there is a good chance the market will move (high
volatility), and at the same time believes the movement will be to the upside (bullish on
direction), it makes sense to buy the 100/105 spread. On the other hand, if the trader
believes the market is unlikely to move significantly (low volatility), but at the same time
believes that whatever movement does occur is likely to come on the upside (also
bullish), it makes sense to buy the 95/100 spread. In both cases the trader is trying to
maximize the return on his investment when he is right and minimize the loss when
he is wrong.

Why might a trader with a directional opinion prefer a vertical spread to an outright
long or short position in the underlying instrument? For one thing, a vertical spread is
much less risky than an outright position. A trader who wants to take a position which
is 500 deltas long can either buy five underlying contracts or buy 25 vertical call spreads
with a delta of 20 each. The 25 vertical spreads may sound riskier than five underlying
contracts, until we remember that a vertical spread has limited risk while the position
in the underlying has open-ended risk. Of course, greater risk also means greater reward.
A trader with a long or short position in the underlying market can reap huge rewards
if the market makes a large move in his favor. By contrast, the vertical spreader’s profits
are limited, but he will also be much less bloodied if the market makes an unexpected
move in the wrong direction.

Experienced traders accept the fact that they are human, and that their directional
forecasts will occasionally be wrong. When that happens the vertical spreader has a
distinct advantage over the trader with an outright position in the underlying market.
By intelligently estimating volatility, an option trader can decide whether he wants time
working for or against him. When he chooses to have time on his side (positive theta),
he can sometimes show a profit when the outright trader either breaks even or shows
a loss. When he chooses to have time working against him (positive gamma), the option
trader’s losses when he is wrong about market direction will often be less than the losses
from an outright underlying position.


--- 第 222 页 ---

11%

- Option Arbitrage

One important characteristic of options is that they can be combined with other options
or underlying contracts to create positions with characteristics which are almost
identical to some other contract or combination of contracts. This type of replication
leads to a new category of trading strategies which are unique to the option market.

SYNTHETIC POSITIONS

Suppose a trader has the following position where all options are European (no early
exercise permitted):

long a June 100 call
short a June 100 put

What will happen to this position at expiration? It may seem that one cannot answer
the question without knowing where the underlying contract will be at expiration.
Surprisingly, the price of the underlying contract does not affect the outcome. If the
underlying contract is above 100, the put will expire worthless, but the trader will
exercise the 100 call. This results in his buying the underlying contract at 100.
Conversely, if the underlying contract is below 100, the call will expire worthless, but
the trader will be assigned on the 100 put. This also results in his buying the underlying
contract at 100.

Ignoring for the moment the unique case when the underlying contract is right at
100, at June expiration the above position will always result in the trader going long the
underlying instrument at the exercise price of 100. He will go long, either by choice
(the underlying contract is above 100 and he exercises the 100 call} or by force (the
underlying contract is below 100 and he is assigned on the 100 put). We refer to this
position as a synthetic long underlying. The position has the same characteristics as the
underlying contract, but won’t actually become an underlying contract until expiration.

If the trader takes the opposite position, selling a June 100 call and purchasing a
June 100 put, he has a synthetic short underlying. This position will always result in his
selling the underlying contract at the exercise price of 100, either by choice (the
underlying contract is below 100 and he exercises the 100 put) or by force (the
underlying contract is above 100 and he is assigned on the 100 call).

213


--- 第 223 页 ---

214 Chapter 11

We can express the foregoing relationships as follows:

synthetic long underlying = long call + short put
synthetic short underlying = short call + long put

where all options expire at the same time and have the same exercise price.

A synthetic position acts very much like its real equivalent. For each point the
underlying instrument rises, a synthetic long position will gain approximately one point
in value and a synthetic short position will lose approximately one point in value. This
leads us to conclude, correctly, that the delta of a synthetic underlying position is
approximately 100. If the delta of the June 100 call is 75, the delta of the June 100 put
will be approximately —25. If the delta of the June 100 put is -60, the delta of the June
100 call will be approximately 40. Ignoring the positive sign associated with a call and
the negative sign associated with a put, the deltas of calls and puts with the same
underlying contract, expiration date, and exercise price will always add up to approxi-
mately 100. As we will see, interest rates, as well as the possibility of early exercise, can
cause the delta of a synthetic underlying position to be slightly more or less than 100.
But for most practical calculations, traders tend to look at a synthetic underlying position
and mentally assign ita delta of 100.

Rearranging the components of a synthetic underling position, we can create four
other synthetic relationships:

synthetic long call = long an underlying contract + long put
synthetic short call = short an underlying contract + short put

synthetic long put = short an underlying contract + long call
synthetic short put = long an underlying contract + short call

Again, all options must expire at the same time and have the same exercise price.
Each synthetic position has a delta approximately equal to its real equivalent and will
therefore gain or lose value at approximately the same rate as its real equivalent.

If the underlying instrument in our examples is a June futures contract, we can
create six synthetic positions:

synthetic long June future = long June 100 call + short June 100 put
synthetic short June future = short June 100 call + Jong June 100 put

synthetic long June 100 call = long June future + long June 100 put
synthetic short June 100 call = short June future + short June 100 put

synthetic long June 100 put = short June future + long June 100 call
synthetic short June 100 put = long June future + short June 100 call

We need not create a synthetic position using the 100 exercise price. We can
choose any available exercise price. Along June 110 call together with a short June 110
put is still a synthetic long June futures contract; however, at June expiration the June
futures contract will be purchased at 110. A short June 95 call together with a long June
95 put is a synthetic short June futures contract. But at expiration the June futures
contract will be sold at 95.


--- 第 224 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 215

Suppose an underlying contract is trading at 102.00 and we want to take a long
position in the market. We can simply go into the underlying market and buy the
contract at 102.00. But we now have an additional choice. We can take a long synthetic
position by purchasing a June call and selling a June put at the same exercise price.
Which of these strategies is best? As with any option strategy, the decision depends on
the prices of the options in the marketplace. Suppose the June 100 call is trading at 5.00
and the June 100 put is trading at 3.00. If we buy the June 100 call for 5.00 and sell
the June 100 put for 3.00, we will show an immediate debit of 2.00. If at expiration the
underlying contract is at 110.00, we will show a credit of 10.00 when we exercise our
June 100 call, for a total profit of 8.00. If we ignore interest considerations, this is
identical to the profit we would have realized had we instead bought the underlying
contract at 102.00. This is shown in Figure 11-1.

Suppose the underlying contract is still trading at 102.00, but now the June 100
call is trading at 4.90 and the June 100 put is trading at 3.05. If we take a synthetic long
underlying position by purchasing the June 100 call and selling the June 100 put, we
will show a debit of 1.85. Now if the underlying contract is at 110.00 at expiration we
will show a total profit of 8.15 (the debit of 1.85 from the option trades, plus the
10-point credit when we exercise the 100 call]. This is .15 better than we would do by
taking a long position in the underlying contract at 102.00.

As long as the price of the June 100 call is exactly two points greater than the price
of the June 100 put, the profit or loss resulting from a synthetic position will be identical

Figure 11-1
20:

buy a 100 call at 5.00 and sell a 100 put at 3.00
184 or
buy an underlying contract at 102.00

seil a 100 put at 3.00 ne a ee Te neem ce

Profit & Loss
9°

T —T T T
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 415 120
Underlying Price


--- 第 225 页 ---

216 Chapter 11

to an actual position taken in the underlying contract at a price of 102.00. The difference
between the call and put price is often referred to as the synthetic market. In the absence
of any interest or dividend considerations, the value of the synthetic market can be
expressed as:

call price — put price = underlying price — exercise price

If this equality holds, there is no difference between taking a position in the underlying
market, or taking an equivalent synthetic position in the option market. With the June
100 call at 5.00 and the June 100 put at 3.00, we can write:

5.00 - 3.00 = 102.00 — 100.00
2.00 = 2.00

There is no difference between the synthetic and its real equivalent.
With the June 100 call at 4.90 and the June 100 put at 3.05, we can write:

4.95 — 3.05 # 102.00 — 100.00
1.90 ¥ 2.00

Here the synthetic side is cheaper, and we therefore prefer to take a long underlying
position synthetically by purchasing the call and selling the put.

Now suppose the price of the June 100 call is 5.15 and the price of the June 100
put is 2.90, with the underlying contract still trading at 102.00. We have:

5.15 = 2.90 # 102.00 — 100.00
2.25 # 2.00

Now the real side is cheaper, so we prefer to take a long position by purchasing the
actual underlying contract. On the other hand, if we want to take a short underlying
position, we will prefer to sell the underlying contract synthetically by selling the call
and purchasing the put. If we do this, we are selling a contract which is only worth 2.00
for 2.25.

The reader may have noted that the synthetic and real markets will he the same
when the time value of the call and the time value of the put are identical. In our
example, the synthetic and real markets are identical when the June 100 call and the
June 100 put both have the same amount of time value. If this is not true, there is always
a synthetic position which is either too cheap or too expensive with respect to its real
equivalent.

The three-sided relationship between a call, a put, and its underlying contract
means that we can always express the value of any one of these contracts in terms of
the other two:

underlying price = call price — put price + exercise price
call price = underlying price + put price — exercise price
put price = call price — underlying price + exercise price

This three-sided relationship is sometimes referred to as put-call parity.


--- 第 226 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 217

CONVERSIONS AND REVERSALS

If we take a synthetic long or short underlying position, our primary concern, as with
an actual underlying position, is the direction of the market. If the market moves in our
favor, we expect to show a profit; if it moves against us, we expect to show a loss. If we
execute the synthetic at favorable prices we may gain more or lose less, but it is still
primarily the direction of the market in which we are interested.

Suppose, as before, the underlying contract is trading at 102.00, the June 100 call
is trading at 5.10, and the June 100 put is trading at 2.85. The synthetic market should
be 2.00 (underlying price less the exercise price}, but is actually 2.25. If we wanted to
take a short position in the underlying market, we would certainly prefer to do so
synthetically (sell the call, buy the put}. Suppose we are not interested in taking a
directional position. Is there any way we can profit from the difference in price between
the real and synthetic markets?

When a trader identifies two contracts which are essentially the same but which
are trading at different prices, the natural course is to execute an arbitrage by purchasing
the cheaper contract and selling the more expensive. Since the synthetic position and
its real equivalent are essentially the same, and since they are trading at different prices
(2.25 vs. 2.00), an option trader might try to purchase the cheaper contract (the
underlying contract} and sell the more expensive (the synthetic equivalent}. That is, he
might try to purchase the underlying contract for 102.00, and simultaneously sell the
call for 5.10 and buy the put for 2.85. The cash flows from these transactions are:

Transaction Cash flow
underlying purchase ~102.00
call sale +5.10
put purchase -2.85
exercise or assignment (at 100) at expiration +100.00
total 4.25

No matter what happens in the underlying market, the underlying position will do
exactly .25 better than the synthetic position, The entire position will therefore show a
profit of .25, regardless of movement in the underlying market. This is shown in Figure
11-2.

The foregoing position, where the purchase of an underlying contract is offset by
the sale of a synthetic position, is known as a conversion. The opposite position, where
the sale of an underlying contract is offset by the purchase of a synthetic position, is
known as a reverse conversion or, more commonly, a reversal. A reversal would be
profitable if the underlying contract were trading at 102.00, and the difference between
the prices of the June 100 call and June 100 put were less than 2.00. For example, with
the June 100 call at 4.90 and the June 100 put at 3.05, the synthetic price is 1.85. By
purchasing the synthetic at 1.85 (buy the call at 4.90, sell the put at 3.05}, and selling
the underlying contract at 102.00, the reverse conversion would lock in a profit of .15.
This is shown in Figure 11-3.


--- 第 227 页 ---

218 Chapter I 1

Figure 11-2
3
Y v
~ short a 100 call at 5.10 Pa
2- ; X long a 100 put at 2.85 a“
os yma (synthetic short) a
ss “
‘ a

combined positions

(conversion) a a

Q
ao
fe} ~" _
of ee 4
o ~
a ws
“14 “ “
. “ . ~~ long an underlying NN
-24 a contract at 102.00 NN
»
+3 T TT T T T
99 100 101 102 103 104 105
Underlying Price
Summarizing:
conversion = long underlying + synthetic short underlying
= long underlying + short call + long put
reversal = short underlying + synthetic long underlying

= short underlying + long call + short put

As before, we assume that the call and the put have the same exercise price and
expiration date.

Conversions and reversals are classified as arbitrage strategies because of their
similarity to traditional arbitrage. Typically, an arbitrageur will attempt to simultane-
ously buy and sell the same items in different markets to take advantage of price
discrepancies between the two markets. He might, for example, buy gold in New York
for $389 per ounce, and sell it in London for $392 per ounce. The profit margin of $3,
while small, is secure since the risk of a trade in one market is almost immediately offset
by an identical but opposing trade in another market. Unlike a speculator, who usually
hopes to make a large profit on a smal! number of trades, an arbitrageur hopes to make
a small profit on a large number of trades. An arbitrageur is willing to do much greater
size than the speculator because the risk is much smaller.

Like traditional arbitrages, conversions and reversals involve buying and selling the
same thing in different markets. A conversion involves buying the underlying instru-


--- 第 228 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 219

Figure 11-3
3
4 a short an underlying “o
~ contract at 102.00 “
— “
14 combined position eS ,
(reversal) NO
3 SN ”
3 0 - son ae —
= . ~
o SY
a
N
14 _
. N
“ SN
“ ~ long a 100 call at 4.90 \
4 short a 100 put at 3.05 ~,
-24 oe (synthetic long) NN
-3 T T T T T
99 100 101 102 103 104 105

Underlying Price

ment, whether a stock or commodity, in the underlying market, and selling the
underlying instrument, synthetically, in the option market. A reversal involves selling
the underlying instrument in the underlying market, and buying the underlying instru-
ment, synthetically, in the option market. The profitability of these strategies is deter-
mined by the relationship between the synthetic price and the actual underlying price.
Synthetic positions are often used to execute conversions and reversals, so traders
sometimes refer to the synthetic market (the difference between the call price and put
price) as the conversion/reversal market.

All experienced traders are familiar with the price relationship between a synthetic
position and its underlying contract, so that any imbalance in the conversion/reversal
market is likely to be short-lived. If the synthetic is overpriced, all traders will want to
execute a conversion (buy the underlying, sell the call, buy the put). If the synthetic is
underpriced, all traders will want to execute a reversal (sell the underlying, buy the call,
sell the put). Such activity, where everyone is attempting to do the same thing, will
quickly force the synthetic market back to equilibrium. Indeed, imbalances in the
conversion/reversal market are usually small and rarely last for more than a few
seconds. When imbalances do exist, an option trader is usually willing to execute
conversions and reversals in very large size because of the low risk associated with such
strategies.


--- 第 229 页 ---

220 Chapter 11

We initially broke down a synthetic position into its component cash flows,
enabling us to identify the basic relationship between a synthetic and its underlying
instrument:

call price — put price = underlying price — exercise price

However, when and how the component cash flows occur can alter this relationship.
Since there can be different settlement procedures associated with different underlying
instruments as well as with options, in order to calculate the exact value of a synthetic
position we need to consider how these settlement procedures affect the basic synthetic
relationship.

Futures Option Markets

If the cash flow resulting from an option trade and a trade in the underlying instrument
is identical, the synthetic relationship is simply:

call price — put price = underlying price — exercise price

This will be true if interest rates are zero, or in futures markets where both the
underlying contract and options on that contract are subject to futures-type settlement.
In the latter case there is no interest component because no cash changes hands when
either the futures contract or the options on that contract are traded. This is currently
the procedure on many non-U.S. exchanges.

In futures markets, where options are subject to stock-type (cash) settlement, while
no cash will change hands when the futures contract is traded, there will be an
exchange of cash when options are traded. The interest considerations on the credit or
debit will therefore have to be taken into consideration when calculating the value of a
synthetic position.

Using our earlier example, with the June futures contract at 102.00, the June 100
call at 5.00, and the June 100 put at 3.00, we have:

call price — put price = underlying price — exercise price
5.00 -3.00 = 102.00 - 100.00
2.00 = 2.00

At these prices there does not appear to be any profit opportunity from either a
conversion or reversal. If we do either of these strategies, the credit and debits from the
two sides of the equation exactly offset each other.

Suppose, however, that we decide to do a reversal by selling the underlying futures
contract for two points (underlying price minus exercise price) and buying the synthetic
for two points (call price minus put price). Suppose also that the options are subject to
stock-type (cash) settlement, as is generally true in U.S. futures markets. We will lay out
2.00 on the option trades, and we will not get this money back until expiration when
we will buy the underlying futures contract, which we originally sold at 102, for 100.
If interest rates are currently 8% per annum, and there are three months remaining to
expiration, there will be a 2% carrying cost on the two-point debit resulting from the
option trades. Based on the simple synthetic relationship, we expected to break even on


--- 第 230 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 221

the conversion. In fact we will end up losing 2% x 2.00, or .04, because of the cost of
carrying the debit to expiration. If we really want to break even, we will have to find
some way to offset this interest cost of .04. We might, for example, purchase the call
for .04 less (4.96), or sell the put for .04 more (3.04), or sell the futures contract for .04
more {102.04}. Or we might use a combination of these three transactions, for example
by purchasing the call for 4.98, selling the put for 3.01, and selling the futures contract
for 102.01. The result is a savings of .04, an amount equal to the carrying cost on the
debit resulting from the option trades.

Assuming that all options are European (no early exercise permitted), we can now
express the synthetic relationship in futures markets where the options are settle in cash
as follows:

call price — put price = futures price — exercise price — carrying costs

where the carrying costs are calculated on either the difference between the futures
price and the exercise price, or the difference between the call price and put price, both
of which will be approximately the same. In our example, if the call is trading for 4.98,
the put for 3.01, and the futures contract for 102.01, the synthetic market is exactly
balanced since:

4.98 - 3.01 = 102.01 - 100.00 - .04
1.97 = 1.97
Using put-call parity, we can always calculate a call, put, or underlying futures price
when we know the prices of any two of the other contracts. For example, with a June
futures contract at 102.00, and the June 100 put at 2.75, we have:

call price = futures price — exercise price + put price — carrying costs
102.00 — 100.00 + 2.75 — .04
= 471

With the June 100 call at 5.35 and the June futures contract at 101.90, we have:

iH

put price = call price + exercise price — futures price + carrying costs
5.35 + 100.00 — 101.90 + .04
= 3.49

Finally, with the June 100 call at 3.25 and the June 100 put at 1.25, we have:

futures price = call price— putprice + exercise price + carrying costs
3.25 — 1.25 + 100.00 + .04
102.04

Stock Option Markets

Consider a stock trading at 103, with aJune 100 call trading at six and a June 100 put
trading at three. If there are no interest or dividend considerations, the synthetic market
seems to be balanced since:


--- 第 231 页 ---

222 Chapter 11

call price — put price = stock price — exercise price
6-3=103-100
3=3

Suppose we decide to do a conversion by purchasing the stock for 103 and selling
the synthetic for three points (call price minus put price). We will lay out 103 for the
stock, take in six for the call, and lay out three for the put. These trades will create a
total debit of 100, a debit which we will have to carry to expiration, at which time we
will sell the stock for 100, either through exercise of the put or assignment of the call.
Since interest rates in the real world are not zero, there will be a cost associated with
carrying this debit. If interest rates are currently 8% per annum, and there are three
months remaining to expiration, there will be a 2% carrying cost on the 100-point debit
resulting from the trades. Based on the simple synthetic relationship, we expected to
break even on the conversion. But in fact we will end up losing 2% x 100, or two points,
because of the cost of carrying the debit to expiration. If we really want to break even,
we will have to find some way to offset this two-point interest cost. We might do this
by selling the call for two points more (8), or by purchasing the put for two points less
(1), or by purchasing the stock for two points less (101). Or we might use a combination
of these three transactions, for example by selling the call for 7, purchasing the put for
24, and purchasing the stock for 10214. The result is a savings of two points, an
amount equal to the carrying cost on the debit resulting from the trades.

Taking into consideration the interest rate component, we can express the syn-
thetic relationship as:

call price — put price = stock price — exercise price + carrying costs

where the carrying costs are calculated on the exercise price.! In our example, if the
call is trading for 7, the put for 2', and the stock for 10214, the synthetic market is
exactly balanced since:

7 -214=102'4-100+2
4,= 414

Now suppose that prior to expiration the stock will pay a dividend of 114. When we
did our conversion we purchased stock, so we will receive an extra 114 points when
the dividend is paid. Given this, we can afford to pay up to 11% points more for the
conversion and still do no worse than break even. We could, for example, sell the call
for 51, or buy the put for four, or buy the stock for 104. Or, as before, we might
combine these three trades by selling the call for six, buying the put for 314, and buying
the stock for 10314.

Assuming that all options are European (no early exercise permitted), and taking
into consideration both interest rates and dividends, we can now express the full value
of the synthetic relationship in the stock option market as:

1. The exact value depends on the discounted price, or present value, of the exercise price. For a more
detailed explanation, see Appendix B.


--- 第 232 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 223

call price - put price = stock price — exercise price + carrying costs — dividends

where the carrying costs are calculated on the exercise price and the dividends are those
expected prior to expiration.

Using put-call parity, we can always calculate a call, put, or underlying stock price
when we know the prices of any two of the other contracts. For example, with the stock
at 102 and the June 100 put at 314, we have:

call price = stock price — exercise price + put price + carrying costs — dividends
102-100+344+2-1l4
= 5%

Ul

With the June 100 call at 61% and the stock at 10114, we have:

put price = call price + exercise price — stock price — carrying costs + dividends
614+100-10114%4-2+114

= 4%

Finally, with the June 100 call at 7 and the June 100 put at 154, we have:

stock price = call price — put price + exercise price — carrying costs + dividends
7-—1%4+100-24+1%
104%

ll

ARBITRAGE RISK

New option traders are often instructed to go into the market and concentrate on
executing conversions and reversals because these strategies are riskless. Beware: There
are no riskless strategies. There are only strategies with greater or lesser risk. The risks
of doing conversions or reversals may not be immediately apparent, but they exist
nonetheless.

Interest Rate Risk

Whenever there is a cash flow associated with a trade, the value of the trade depends
on the interest which can be earned on a credit or which must be paid to carry a debit
over the life of the trade. This is a function of interest rates, and since interest rates may
not be constant, the interest considerations can change over time. If part of the expected
profit from a trade depends on our earning 8% ona credit balance, a reduction in interest
rates to 6% will certainly reduce our profit, and might even result in a loss. If part of the
expected profit from a trade depends on our paying 7% on a debit balance, an increase
in interest rates to 10% will likewise reduce our profit. In practice, large changes in
interest rates over the limited life of most options? are the exception rather than the

2. We are referring here primarily to exchange traded options with expirations up to approximately nine
months. Long-term options with expirations of up to several years will obviously be much more
sensitive to changes in interest rates.


--- 第 233 页 ---

224 Chapter 11

tule. For this reason the interest rate risk associated with conversions and reversals is
relatively small.

Note also that synthetic strategies in the stock option market are much more
sensitive to interest rates than the same strategies in the futures option market. A stock
option conversion or reversal includes the cash flow from the underlying stock, while a
similar trade in the futures option market includes no such cash flow. The cash flow
from a stock trade is always greater than the cash flow from an option trade since the
price of stock is always greater than the price of the options.

Execution Risk

Since no market participant wants to give away money, a trader is unlikely to be offered
a profitable conversion or reversal all at one time. Consequently, he will have to execute
one or two legs of the strategy, and hope to be able to execute the final leg(s) at a later
time. He may, for example, initially purchase the underlying contract and puts, and later
hope to complete the conversion by selling calls. However, if call prices begin to fall, he
may never be able to profitably complete the conversion. Even a professional trader on
an exchange, who would seem to be ina good position to know the prices of all three
contracts, can be fooled. He may purchase a call and sell a put (synthetic long
underlying) at what he thinks are good prices. However, when he tries to sell the
underlying contract to complete the reversal, he may find that the price is much lower
than what he thought it was. Anytime a strategy is executed one leg at a time, there is
always the risk of an adverse change in prices before the strategy can be completed.

Pin Risk

When we introduced the concept of a synthetic position, we assumed that at expiration
either the underlying market would be above the exercise price, in which case any call
would be exercised, or below the exercise price, in which case any put would be
exercised. But what will happen if the underlying market is exactly equal, or pinned,
to the exercise price at the moment of expiration?

Suppose a trader has executed a June 100 conversion: he is short a June 100 call,
longa June 100 put, and long the underlying contract. If the underlying market is above
or below 100 at expiration, there is no problem. He will either be assigned on the call
or will exercise the put. In either case he will offset his tong underlying position so that
he will have no market position on the day following expiration.

Now suppose that at the moment of expiration the underlying market is right at
100. The trader would like to be rid of his underlying position. If he doesn’t get assigned
on the call, he plans to exercise his put; if he does get assigned on the call, he will let
the put expire worthless. In order to make a decision, he must know whether the call
will be exercised. Unfortunately, he won't know this until the day after expiration,
when he either does or does not receive an assignment notice. But then it will be too
late because the call will have expired.

It may seem that an option which is exactly at-the-money at expiration will never
be exercised since, in theory, it has no value. In fact many at-the-money options do get
exercised. Even though such an option has no theoretical value, it does have some


--- 第 234 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 225

practical value. For example, suppose the owner of a call which is exactly at-the-money
at expiration wants to take a long position in the underlying contract. He has two
choices. He can either exercise the call or buy the underlying contract. Since most
exchanges where options are traded include the right of exercise in the original
transaction cost, it is almost always cheaper to exercise the call. Even if there is a charge
for exercise, it will be less than the cost of trading the underlying contract. Anyone
owning an at-the-money option, and choosing to take a long or short position at
expiration, will find that it is cheaper to exercise the option than buy or sell the
underlying contract.

Clearly, the trader who is short an at-the- money option at expiration has a problem.
What can he do?

One course might be to guess whether the trader will be assigned. If the market
appears to be strong on the last trading day, the trader might assume that it will continue
higher on the day following expiration. If the person who holds the call sees the situation
similarly, it is logical to assume that the call will be exercised. Hence, the trader will
choose not to exercise the put. Unfortunately, if the trader is wrong, and he does not
get assigned on the call, he will find himself with a long underlying position which he
would rather not have. Conversely, if the market appears to be weak on the last trading
day, the trader might make the assumption that he will not be assigned on the call. He
will therefore choose to exercise the put. But again, if he is wrong and does get an
assignment notice, he will find himself with an unwanted short underlying position on
the day following expiration.

The risk of a wrong guess can be further compounded by the fact that conversions
and reversals, because of their low risk, are usually done in large size. If the trader
guesses wrong, he may find himself naked long or short not one, but several hundred
underlying contracts.

There can be no certain solution to the problem of pin risk. With many, perhaps
thousands, of open contracts outstanding, some at-the-money options will be exercised
and some won't. If the trader lets the position go to expiration and relies on luck, he is
at the mercy of the fates, and that is a position which an intelligent option trader prefers
to avoid. The practical solution is to avoid carrying conversions and reversals to
expiration when there is a real possibility of expiration right at the exercise price. If the
trader has a large number of June 100 conversions or reversals, and expiration is
approaching with the underlying market close to 100, the sensible course is to reduce
the pin risk by reducing the size of the position. If the trader doesn’t reduce the size, he
may find that he is under considerable pressure to get out of a large number of risky
Positions at the last moment.

Sometimes even a careful trader will find that he has some at-the-money conver-
sions or reversals outstanding as expiration approaches. One way to eliminate the pin
risk which still exists is to liquidate the position at the prevailing market prices.
Unfortunately, this is likely to be a losing proposition since the trader will be forced to
trade each contract at an unfavorable price, either buying at the offer or selling at the
bid. Fortunately, it is often possible to trade out of such a position al! at once at a fair
Price.


--- 第 235 页 ---

226 Chapter 11

Since conversions and reversals are common strategies in all option markets, a
trader who has an at-the-money conversion and is worried about pin risk can be fairly
certain that there are also traders in the market who have at-the-money reversals and
are also worried about pin risk. If the trader with the conversion could finda trader with
a reversal and cross positions with him, both traders would eliminate the pin risk
associated with their positions. This is why, on option exchanges, one often finds traders
looking for other traders who want to trade conversions or reversals at even money.
This simply means that a trader wants to trade out of his position at a price which is fair
to everyone involved, so that everyone can avoid the problem of pin risk. Whatever
profit a trader expected to make from the conversion or reversal presumably resulted
from the initial trade, not from the closing trade.

Certain options, such as stock indices and Eurodollars, are settled at expiration in
cash rather than with the delivery of an actual underlying contract. When such an
option expires, the amount of cash which flows into or out of a trader’s account is simply
the amount by which the option is in-the-money, i.e., the difference between the
underlying price and the option’s exercise price. There is no pin risk associated with
options which settle in this manner because no underlying position results from exercise
or assignment.

Interest rate risk, execution risk, and pin risk are common to all markets, regardless
of the underlying contract. There are, however, certain risks which are unique to a
market depending on the characteristics of the underlying market.

Settlement Risk in the Futures Market

Let’s go back to our original conversion where a trader is short a June 100 call, long a
June 100 put, and long an underlying contract. Suppose the underlying contract is a
June futures contract which is trading at 102.00. If there are three months remaining
to June expiration, interest rates are 8%, and all options are subject to stock-type (cash)
settlement, the value of the June 100 synthetic market (the difference between the June
100 call and the June 100 put) is:

futures price — exercise price — carry on 2 points for 3 months =
102 — 100 - (2 x 3/12 x 8%) = 1.96

Suppose a trader is able to sell a June 100 call for 5.00, buy a June 100 put for 3.00,
and sell a June futures contract for 102.00. If interest rates do not change, and assuming
there will not be a problem with pin risk, at expiration the trader should realize a profit
of .04, since he has done the June 100 conversion at .04 better than its value.

Suppose that shortly after the trader initiates this conversion, the underlying June
futures contract falls to 98.00. The synthetic (short) side of the position will now show
a profit of four points: the short call and long put together will appreciate by four points.
But because the options are settled like stock, the profit on the synthetic side will only
be a paper profit, and will not be fully realized until expiration. On the other hand, the
trader is also long a June futures contract, and this contract, since it is subject to
futures-type settlement, will result in an immediate four point debit when the market
drops four points. To cover this four point debit, the trader wil! either have to borrow


--- 第 236 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 227

the money or take the money out of an existing, interest-bearing account. In either case
there will be a loss in interest, and this interest loss will not be offset by the paper profit
from the option position. If the loss in interest is great enough, it may more than offset
the profit of .04 which the trader originally expected from the position. And in the most
extreme case, where the trader does not have access to the funds required to feed the
futures position, the trader may be forced to liquidate the position. Needless to say,
forced liquidations are never profitable.

Of course, this works both ways. A rise in the price of the underlying futures
contract to 106.00 will result in a four point loss to the synthetic side: the short call and
long put together will decline by four points. But the loss on the synthetic side will only
be a paper loss, and will not be fully realized until expiration. On the other hand, the
rise in the futures contract will result in an immediate cash credit, a credit on which the
trader can earn interest. This interest will increase his potential profit beyond the
original expected profit of .04,

Most futures option traders think of conversions and reversals as being delta
neutral, but in fact this is not necessarily true. With the underlying futures contract at
102, the deltas in our example might be:

Option Position Delta Position
short June 100 call ~60
long June 100 put ~38
long June futures contact +100
total +2

The two extra deltas reflect the fact that the trader would prefer the market to rise rather
than fall, so that cash will flow into his account from the futures position. The interest
from this cash flow can represent an unexpected profit or loss, in the case of a decline
in the futures price.

Two deltas are really no risk, except when we remember that conversions and
reversals, because of their low risk, are often done in very large size. A trader who
executes 500 conversions has a risk delta equal to 500 x +2 = +1000. This is the same
as being naked long 10 futures contracts. The risk comes from the interest that can be
earned on any cash credit, or which must be paid on any cash debit, resulting from
movement in the underlying futures contract.

The amount by which the delta of a synthetic futures position will differ from 100
depends on the interest risk associated with the position. This in turn depends on two
factors: the general level of interest rates and the amount of time remaining to
expiration. The higher the interest rate and the more time remaining to expiration, the
greater the risk. The lower the interest rate and the Jess time remaining to expiration,
the less the risk. A 10% interest rate with nine months to expiration represents a much
greater risk than a 4% interest rate with one month remaining to expiration. In the
former case, the deltas of a synthetic position may add up to 94, while in the latter case
the deltas may add up to 99,

Note that there is no settlement risk when both contracts are subject to the same
settlement procedure. If all contracts are subject to stock-type settlement, no cash flow


--- 第 237 页 ---

228 Chapter 1 1

results from fluctuations in the prices of the contracts prior to expiration. If all contracts
are subject to futures-type settlement, any credit or debit resulting from changes in the
price of the underlying futures contract will be offset by an equal but opposite cash flow
from changes in prices of the option contracts.

Dividend Risk in the Stock Market

Consider a stock trading at 10214, with three months to June expiration, interest rates
at 8%, and a dividend of 11% expected prior to expiration. The value of the June 100
synthetic (the difference between the 100 call and the June 100 put) is:

stock price — exercise price + carry on 100 to expiration — expected dividends =
10214 - 100 + (100 x 3/12 x 8%) -114=3

Suppose a trader is able to sell a June 100 call for 744, buy a June 100 put for
4//, and buy stock for 1021. If interest rates do not change, and assuming there will
not be a problem with pin risk, at expiration the trader should realize a profit of 14,
since he has done the June 100 conversion at 1% better than its value.

Since the trader owns the stock, part of his profit comes from the |'% point
dividend which he expects to receive when the stock goes ex-dividend. If the dividend
changes unexpectedly, it could affect the trader’s eventual profit. If, for example, the
company is doing poorly and decides to cut its dividend in half, to 34, the trader’s
conversion will be worth % less, and his profit of '/4 will turn into a loss of 14. Of course,
if the company ts doing well and decides to increase its dividend to two points, the
conversion will be worth 14 more, and the trader’s profit will increase from 1% ta 34.
Clearly, the possibility of a change in the expected dividend represents a risk to a
conversion or reversal. Moreover, if multiple dividends are expected over the life of the
strategy, the impact of a change in the company’s dividend policy can be greatly
magnified.

BOXES

As we have seen, a conversion or reversal entails risk because these strategies combine
a synthetic position in options with a position in the underlying contract. The risk arises
because a synthetic position in options and an actual position in the underlying contract
can have different characteristics, either in terms of settlement procedure, as in the
futures option market, or in terms of the dividend payout, as in the stock option market.
How might we eliminate this risk?

One way to eliminate this risk is to eliminate the position in the underlying
contract. Consider a conversion:

short a call
long a put
long an underlying contract


--- 第 238 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 229

If we want to maintain this position, but would also like to eliminate the risk that goes
with holding an underlying position, we might replace the long underlying position with
something that acts like an underlying contract, but which isn’t an underlying contract.
For example, we might replace the long underlying position with a deeply in-the-money
call. Now our position is:

short a call
long a put
long a deeply in-the-money call

If the deeply in-the-money call has a delta of 100, and therefore acts like a long
underlying contract, the position will have the same characteristics as the conversion,

In the same way, instead of replacing the underlying position with a deeply
in-the-money call, we can sell a deeply in-the-money put:

short a call
long a put
short a deeply in-the-money put

If the deeply in-the-money put has a delta of -100, and therefore acts like an underlying
contract, the position will again have the same characteristics as the conversion.

This type of position, where the underlying instrument in a conversion or reversal
is replaced with a deeply inthe-money option, is Known as a three-way. While
eliminating some risks, a three-way is not without its own problems. If a trader sells a
deeply in-the-money option to complete his three-way, he still has the risk of the market
going through the exercise price. Indeed, as the underlying market moves closer and
closer to the exercise price of the deeply in-the-money option, the option will act less
and less like a position in the underlying contract. The combination of contracts will
then act less and less like a true conversion or reversal.

What else acts like an underlying contract but isn’t an underlying contract? A
synthetic underlying position obviously fills the bill. In addition to a three-way, we might
also consider replacing an underlying position in a conversion or reversal with a
synthetic equivalent. For example, our original position might be a 100 conversion:

short a June 100 call
long a June 100 put
long an underlying contract

Suppose we also execute a reversal at 90:

long a June 90 call short a June 100 call
short a June 90 put long a June 100 put
short an underlying contract long an underlying contract

The long and short underlying contracts cancel out, leaving:

long a June 90 call short a June 100 call
short a June 90 put long a June 100 put


--- 第 239 页 ---

230 Chapter 11

We are left with a synthetic long position at the 90 exercise price, and a synthetic short
position at the 100 exercise price. Or we can think of the position as a reversal at one
exercise price, and a conversion at a different exercise price.

This position, known as a box, is similar to a conversion or reversal, except that
any risk associated with holding a position in the underlying contract has been
eliminated because the underlying position has been replaced with a synthetic underly-
ing position at a different exercise price. A trader is long (short) the box when he is
synthetically long (short) the lower exercise price and synthetically short (long) the
higher exercise price. The example position is long a June 90/100 box.

At expiration, regardless of the price of the underlying contract, a trader who has
a box will simultaneously buy the underlying contract at one exercise price and sell the
underlying contract at the other exercise price. The value of the box at expiration will
therefore be exactly the amount between exercise prices. In our example, at expiration
the 90/100 box will be worth exactly 10 points because the trader will simultaneously
buy the underlying contract at 90 and sell itat 100. If itis worth 10 points at expiration,
how much is it worth today? If the options are subject to stock-type settlement, the value
of the box today will be the value of the box at expiration less carrying costs. If our
10-point box expires in three months with interest rates at 8%, the value today is:

10 - (10 x 3/12 x 8%} = 10-.20 = 9.80

Since a box eliminates the risk associated with carrying a position in the underlying
contract, boxes are even less risky than conversions and reversals, which are themselves
low-risk strategies. When all options are European (there is no risk of early exercise),
and the options are settled in cash rather than through delivery of the underlying
contract (there is no pin risk), the purchase or sale of a box is identical to lending or
borrowing funds over the life of the options. In our example, a trader who sells a
10-point box for 9.80 has essentially borrowed funds from the buyer of the box for three
months at an interest rate of 8%. If a trader were willing to pay a higher rate to borrow
funds, he could sell the box at a lower price, for example 9.70. This corresponds to a
rate over three months of 12%. When no other method is available, a trading firm might
be able to raise needed short-term cash by selling boxes. Since the firm will probably
have to sell the boxes at a price lower than the theoretical value, this will increase the
firm’s borrowing costs. Moreover, if the options can be exercised early, or if there is a
danger of pin risk at expiration, this method of borrowing may not be without its own
risks,

We originally introduced a box as a conversion at one exercise price and a reversal
at a different exercise price. Since the long and short underlying positions cancel out,
we are left with two synthetic underlying positions. The June 90/100 box was written:

long a June 90 call short a June 100 call
short a June 90 put long a June 100 put
The left side of the box is a synthetic long at 90 and the right side is a synthetic short at

100. Instead of dividing the box into right and left sides, we can also divide it into top
and bottom sides. Notice that the top side is a bull vertical call spread (long June 90


--- 第 240 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 231

call/short June 100 call}, while the bottom side is a bear vertical put spread (long June
100 put/short June 90 put). Since a box is a combination of two vertical spreads, the
combined prices of the vertical spreads must add up to the value of the box.

For example, with three months remaining to expiration and interest rates at 8%,
the value of our June 90/100 box is 9.80. Suppose a trader knows that the June 90/100
vertical call spread is trading for six points. Without any additional information, the
trader can estimate the fair market price of for the June 90/100 vertical put spread. He
knows 90/100 box is worth 9.80, and that the value ofa call and put vertical spread
must add up to the value of the box. The price of the put spread must therefore be:

9.80 — 6 = 3.80

If the trader believes he can either buy or sell the call vertical spread at six points, and
he is asked for a market in the put spread, he will probably make his market around an
assumed value of 3.80. He might, for example, make a market of 3.50 bid/4.10 ask. If
he is able to buy the put vertical for 3.50, he can then try to buy the call vertical for
6.00. If he is successful, he will have paid a total of 9.50 for a box with a theoretical
value of 9.80. Conversely, if he is able to sell the put vertical for 4.10, he can then try
to sell the call vertical for 6.00. If he is successful, he will have sold a box with a
theoretical value of 9.80 at a price of 10.10.

JELLY ROLLS

Another method of eliminating a position in the underlying contract is to take a synthetic
position in a different expiration month, rather than at a different exercise price as with
a box. For example, suppose we have executed the following reversal:

long a June 100 call
short a June 100 put
short an underlying contract

Suppose we now execute the following conversion:

short a September 100 call
long a September 100 put
long an underlying contract

If the underlying contract for both June and September is identical, they will cancel out,
leaving us with:

long a June 100 call short a September 100 call
short a June 100 put long a September 100 put

These combined long and short synthetic positions taken at the same exercise prices but
in different expiration months is known as a jelly rol? or simply a roll. The strategy is

3. This very unscientific sounding term seems to have originated among traders on the Chicago Board
Options Exchange.


--- 第 241 页 ---

232 Chapter 11

most common in the stock option market where the underlying for both months is the
same.

What should be the value of a roll in the stock option market? In our example, the
sale of the June/September 100 roll, the trader will buy stock at 100 at June expiration
and sell the same stock at 100 at September expiration. The value of the roll is the cost
of holding the stock for the three-month period from June to September. If interest rates
are 8%, the holding costs are:

100 x 3/12 x 8% = 2.00

Therefore, the roll should have a value of two points. Expressed another way, the
difference between the June 100 synthetic (the June 100 call less the June 100 put) and
the September 100 synthetic (the September 100 call less the September 100 put}
should be exactly two points.

Now suppose that the stock pays a quarterly dividend of 34 point. Since the trader
will own the stock for the period from June to September, he will receive the 4 point
dividend. The value of the roll is now the two-point carrying cost less the 34 point
dividend, or 1%. The full value of the roll is:

jelly roll = long term synthetic - short-term synthetic
cost of carry — expected dividends

where the cost of carry is calculated on the exercise price over the period between
expiration months.

In the same way that we evaluated a box as the combination of two vertical spreads,
we can also evaluate a jelly roll as the difference between two time spreads:

long a June 100 call short a September 100 call
short a June 100 put long a September 100 put

This is simply a short June/September 100 call time spread and a long June/September
put time spread. Since the roll is a combination of the sale of a call (put) time spread
and the purchase of put (call) time spread, the values of the call and put times spreads
should differ by exactly the value of the roll. If the roll is worth 11/4, the difference
between the call and put time spreads should also be 11%. If the call time spread is
trading for 31/4, the put time spread should be trading for 2. This is logical when we
realize that we can rewrite the jelly roll in a slightly different form:

jelly roll = long-term synthetic — short-term synthetic

(long-term call — long-term put) - (short-term call — short-term put)
(long-term call — short-term call) — (long-term put — short-term put}
carrying costs — expected dividends

The difference between the call and put time spreads should therefore be equal to the
cost of carry on the exercise price less the expected dividends.


--- 第 242 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 233

Since jelly rolls involve holding stock positions for some period of time, they have
risks similar to those affecting conversions and reversals. If interest rates rise, or the
dividend is cut, a jelly roll will become more valuable. If interest rates fall, or the
dividend is increased, a jelly roll will become less valuable.

Finally, we can create a time box by taking opposing synthetic positions at different
exercise prices and expiration dates:

long a June 90 call short a September 100 call
short a June 90 put long a September 100 put

The value of this position is the combined value of purchasing the June 90/100 box and
selling the June/September 100 jelly roll. If the June 90/100 box is worth 934, and the
June/September 100 jelly roll is worth 11, the time box should be worth 8!/.

USING SYNTHETICS IN VOLATILITY SPREADS

A trader need not restrict himself to using synthetics only in arbitrage strategies. He can
also execute a volatility or directional strategy using a synthetic. Consider the following
situation. Dealing in a futures option market where the underlying March futures
contract is trading very actively at 100.00, a trader wants to execute the following
backspread for a one-point credit:

buy 20 March 105 calls
sell 10 March 100 calls

That is, the amount he expects to receive for the sale of one March 100 call less the
amount he expects to pay for two March 105 calls should equal one point. Suppose the
current market in these options is:

Option Bid/ Ask
March 100 call 2.70/2.90
March 105 call 85/.95

If the trader were able sell the March 100 calls at the ask price of 2.90, he would be
willing to pay the ask price of .95 for the March 105 calls, since 2.90 — (2 x .95) = 1.00.
In the same way, if he were able to buy the March 105 calls at the bid price of .85, he
would be willing to sell the March 100 calls at the bid price of 2.70, since 2.70 — (2 x
.85) = 1.00.

Suppose that an offer comes into the marketplace to sell March 105 cails at .85.
The trader immediately buys these calls and is about to offer the March 100 calls at
2.70, when suddenly a bid of 2.80 is made for March 100 puts. Does this affect what
the trader might do?

Since the new bid is for the March 100 put, and the trader is interested in selling
the March 100 call, it may seem that the put bid will have no affect on his strategy. But
recall the synthetic relationship:

synthetic short call = short put + short underlying


--- 第 243 页 ---

234 Chapter 11

In the futures market, the value of the call is:
call price = put price + futures price — exercise price — carrying costs

If the underlying March futures contract is trading at 100, there is no carrying cost
associated with a March 100 synthetic because the difference between the futures price
and exercise price is zero. Therefore:

March 100 call = March 100 put + 100- 100-0
March 100 call = March 100 put

In other words, if the trader believes he can trade the March futures contract at 100,
then the prices of the March 100 call and put ought to be identical. He originally
intended to sell the March 100 call at 2.70 to complete his backspread. He is now given
the chance to sell the March 100 call, synthetically, at 2.80. If he sells the March 100
put at 2.80, and simultaneously sells the March futures contract at 100.00, he has
effectively sold the March 100 call at 2.80, which is .10 better than he originally
intended.

Whenever a trader ts consideringa strategy, he ought to always ask himself whether
he can do better by executing some part of his strategy synthetically. Usually he won’t
be able to because synthetic relationships tend to be very efficient. But every now and
then the trader will find that the synthetic position is slightly more favorable. Over a
career of trading even small savings can add up.

Using synthetic equivalents, we can also rewrite some volatility spreads in more
familiar terms. For example, we said that call and put butterflies with the same exercise
prices are identical. Suppose we take a typical call butterfly and rewrite it in terms of its
synthetic equivalents:

Contract Synthetic Equivalent
long 1 March 95 call long 1 March 95 put/long an underlying contract
short 2 March 100 calls short 2 March 100 puts/short 2 underlying contracts
long 1 March 105 call long 1 March 105 put/long an underlying contract
Since the long and short underlying contracts in our synthetic equivalent cancel out, we
are left with a put butterfly:
long 1 March 95 put
short 2 March 100 puts
long 1 March 105 put

Using synthetic equivalents, we can also express the following strategy in a more
familiar form:

long 2 March 100 calls
short an underlying contract

This is simply a long straddle, since we can take one of the March 100 calls and rewrite
it synthetically:

long March 100 call = long March 100 put + long underlying contract


--- 第 244 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 235

leaving: 3

long 1 March 100 call
short an underlying contract

long 1 March 100 put
long an underlying contract

Since the Jong and short underlying contracts cancel out, we are left with a typical long
straddle: ‘

long 1 March 100 call
long 1 March 100 put

TRADING WITHOUT THEORETICAL VALUES

Synthetic relationships can often enable a trader to make logical trading decisions
without the aid of values generated by a theoretical pricing model. Usually all that is
required is an ability to calculate the carrying cost on a position and, in the case of stocks,
to determine the dividend payout.

While a trader can’t always be as certain ofa profit as he is with arbitrage strategies
such as conversions, reversals, boxes, and jelly rolls, there are many logical relationships
between options and underlying contracts, or between options and other options, which
enable a trader to identify potentially profitable trading strategies without the use of a
theoretical pricing model.

Consider the following option prices with the underlying price at 101.50:

95 call 100 call 105 call
8.00 4.80 1.60

Is there anything wrong with these prices?
If the trader purchases one 95 call for 8.00, sells two 100 calls at 4.80, and
purchases one 105 call for 1.60, he has bought the 95/1 00/105 butterfly for zero since:

(2 x 4.80) — (8.00 + 1.60) = 9.60 - 9.60 =0

Since a butterfly can never be worth less than zero at expiration, and in this case might
be worth as much as five points, the purchase of this butterfly represents a riskless
trading opportunity.

Another way of reaching the same conclusion is to realize that a butterfly is made
up of two consecutive vertical spreads. In our example, the purchase of the
95/100/105 butterfly consists or purchasing the 95/100 vertical call spread and selling
the 100/105 vertical call spread. We know that as the market rises, a vertical call spread
goes more deeply into-the-money and becomes more valuable. Therefore, as long as
there is an equal amount between exercise prices, a vertical call spread with lower
exercise prices will always be more valuable than a vertical call spread with higher
exercise prices. The opposite is true of vertical put spreads. Those with higher exercise
prices are always more valuable than those with lower exercise prices. If two vertical
spreads violate this relationship, a trader can take advantage of the situation by


--- 第 245 页 ---

236 Chapter I 1

purchasing the spread which ought to be more valuable, and selling the spread which
ought to be less valuable. In our example, the vertical call spreads are:

95/100 spread 8.00 ~ 4.80 3.20
100/105 spread 4.80 — 1.60 3.20

While both spreads are trading at the same price, the 95/100 spread is intuitively more
valuable than the 100/105 spread. Consequently, a trader will try to purchase the
95/100 spread and sell the 100/105 spread. If he succeeds, he will have purchased the
butterfly for zero. While there is no guarantee that this will be profitable (the underlying
market could finish below 95 or above 105), the strategy still makes sense because there
is no risk associated with it.

Consider a different type of relationship:

Underlying price = 99.75 Interest rate = 0
95 100 105
calls: 6.85 3.70 1,10
puts: 2.10 3.95 6.35

First, we might check to make sure that all the synthetic relationships balance. Since
they do, there is no profit opportunity there. Next, we might check the butterflies. Both
the call and put butterflies are trading for .55. This might or might not be a reasonable
price; without a theoretical pricing model it would be difficult to say. But at least the
butterflies are trading for some positive number, so it is not immediately apparent that
they represent a good trading opportunity. Is there any other logical relationship that
might be violated?
Look at the prices of the straddles:

95 100 105
call + put: 8.95 7.65 74S

We know that a straddle becomes more valuable as the underlying price moves
away from the exercise price, resulting in one side of the straddle, either the call or put,
going more deeply into-the- money. With the underlying price at 99.75, the 95 straddle
should be more valuable than the 100 straddle, and this is reflected in the respective
prices of 8.95 and 7.65. The 105 straddle, being further away from 99.75, should also
be more valuable than the 100 straddle. But here the prices do not reflect the additional
value. The 105 straddle is .30 cheaper than the 100 straddle. Even though we don’t
know the theoretical value of either the 100 or 105 straddle, we do know that the 105
straddle is too cheap with respect to the 100 straddle. Therefore, if given the opportu-
nity, a trader would attempt to purchase the 105 straddle at 7.45 and sell the 100
straddle at 7.65. There is no guarantee that this strategy will be profitable. The
underlying contract could finish above 105, in which case the 100 straddle will be
worth five points more than the 105 straddle. But if we assume that movement is
random, then the sale of the 100 straddle and the purchase of the 105 straddle puts the
laws of probability heavily on the trader’s side.


--- 第 246 页 ---

Option Arbitrage 237

Finally, consider this scenario:

Underlying price = 100.75 Interest rate = 0
95 100 105
March calls: 7.50 3.85 2.35
June calls: 9.65 5.70 3.30

Is there any apparent mispricing here?

First, we might look at the butterflies. The March butterfly is trading for (7.50 +
2.35) — (2 x 3.85} = 2.15. The June butterfly is trading for (9.65 + 3.30) — (2 x 5.70)
= 1.55. Since both butterflies are trading for some positive amount, it isn’t immediately
clear that we should buy or sell either one? What about the prices of the butterflies with
respect to each other? Should the June butterfly, at 1.55, be less expensive than the
March butterfly, at 2.15? It may seem that the June butterfly, with more time to
expiration, ought to be more expensive. In option evaluation we usually associate more
time with greater value. But if the market remains at 100.75, the price of the butterfly
will expand towards 4.25 as time passes. Hence, it is logical that the March butterfly is
more valuable than the June butterfly.

Is there any other relationship we might consider? When we see options with
different expiration dates, time spreads certainly come to mind.

95 100 105
June call less March call: 2.15 1.85 95

Is there anything wrong with these prices?

We know that a time spread maintains its greatest value with the underlying
contract at the exercise price. The 100 time spread, being more at-the-money, is trading
for more than the 105 time spread, as one would expect. The 100 time spread should
also be more valuable than the 95 time spread. Here the 95 time spread is trading at a
greater price, and, again, if we assume random movement in the underlying contract,
this is clearly not logical. Without a theoretical pricing model, we can’t be sure what
each of these spreads is worth. But we do know that the 95 call time spread is too
expensive with respect to the 100 call time spread. If we sell the former and buy the
latter we can’t be certain of a profit, but we do have the laws of probability on our side.

Note that in each of these examples we made an important assumption:

Regardless of the exact theoretical value, there ought to be a uniform
progression of both individual option prices and spread prices in the
marketplace. If this uniform progression is violated, a trader can take
advantage of the situation by purchasing the option or spread which is
relatively cheap and selling the option or spread which is relatively
expensive.

While the great majority of option traders work with theoretical values, a good
habit for the new trader is to quickly check the relationship of option prices and spreads
in the market to ensure that there are no obvious mispricings. The trader can start with


--- 第 247 页 ---

238 Chapter I 1

conversions and reversals, then look at vertical spreads and butterflies, and finally
consider straddles and time spreads. Usually there will not be any obvious mispricing.
But if there is, the trader can exploit the situation by purchasing the cheap side of the
relationship and selling the expensive.

Two evaluation tables, demonstrating typical progressions of option prices and
spreads in a stock option and futures option market, are shown in Figures 11-4 and 11-5.


--- 第 248 页 ---

239

“Zp 4aydeyy ul pessnosip eq

eS

sanjen peaids uo esiosoxe AUBe JO JOSJJe OU! ‘SeNyeA eaTeGou SAeY Aew

speeds ewos pure Ajwed uey] sso] oq ABW sanjeA jeonel0ey) ewos ‘panied aspsexe Aes ou YM ‘uesdoiNy eq 0) pauinsse ale suondo |e souls ,

69°
Po"
#0864
gLe
sot
sSSdt
Soa
Se'et
ee'¢
es
xba'8h
1°
O@L

Option Arbitrage

xo

hd

Od
6°

+08'E1
og'e

HE'St

OG EL
6h t
SLL

gee
bol

cee
86°

be
4%

BVst
sr

prot
PLY

Zeb
Ly

elokelS
LVS
OLL

oe
68

SEE
ook

ge
16'o

oll
os"

esl
£9°9

ZeOh
OL

s9'9
oLe
SO}

bps
6E°%

soe
G2’?

enh
so’e

PPL
S

ors
206

266
BL

00°
46'S
oO}

£84
c6%

28°
coe

okt
s6'e

ods}
eg

See
S6LE

el bt
Le

eve
00°6
s6

se"h
SPs

OL
PLe

pio sg" 9¢°

99°2 9vZ 68'}
of" ZI. 06'0z pO'pz
gp Le

06° eg

o6'e le'>
06't 00°! Lr
OP's oe'6} ig'6%
LZeL Let 6L1Z
9s" ve”

09° 92°

oe'r bo'p
16 ze We
plal POLL 89°12

06 se 08
O=puepinig  —'%00'8 = eyeA ISeLA}U

speaids ew ind
speeds oun je

sa|ppejs eunr
saleynq aunr
syeonaa ynd eunr
SIBamed [feo eunc

synd eunr
sjjeo ounc

soppeys yore
saiaynd yoIeW
S|BOMaA ynd Yyoseyy
S|BOMOA [120 Yoreyy

sind yorey
s|j20 YOreW

'%Ge = ANNeIoA

S¥@em 9Z = eUNC ‘sysem El = YOUR ‘uONeuIdXe 0} ULL

00} = sod yooIS
pbb eanbiy

aS


--- 第 249 页 ---

6V
oc

ory

6b

bop

00°P

ro
vs

1s
ray

$0

ce"
9g"

2e'e
90°

so’e
80°
es

SL
or

Le
ra

or
Le

ose
60°

69%
19

BES
We

ee
02
es

99°
ce"

gL
ec

ss
9s

962
or

2674
66°

se}
gt

oP'l
er
ts

9s"
oy

og
6e

6°
63°

ces

LL

bey

bob

orl

sr
es

Or
6s

es
es

06"
LL

96°
P6'L

es"
9b

op
beh
6P

ee

‘ZL Jeldeyy ul pessnosip aq jm senfed peeids uo asjosexe
Auee Jo eye oul ‘Aued UU] Sse] aq ABW SONIPA JEOl]elosU] alos ‘poyiued esjojexe Ayes ou YM ‘UeedoiNny 9q 0} pelunsse ale suondo [Je souls ,

by
oP’
Oc’e
OL’
be

ese
ves
el’

el
ol?
hg

Soom Z| = Aine

be
BL

OLe
20°

ee
cee

Lhe
20°

£0
PO's
Lv

%00'8 = 3721 JSal9]U]

ey
ia
ver
ray
1s
le
eve
ZO'r
O°
so
£0
66
oF

isyoam p = Ae

speoids own ind
speolds oul feo

seppeas Anc
selpeyng Aine
sjeomed ynd Aine
SfeoMed tyeo Aine
sind Aine

seo Aine

saippens Aew
selpoyng Aeyy
sfeoned ind Aey
S[BONIDA j/eo Aeyy
sind ABW

sifeo Aew

!%G) = AUINEIOA
‘uUONeIGXe 0} GUL
og = soud sounjng

¢-LE eanbi4

240


--- 第 250 页 ---

12%

Early Exercise
of American Options

Thus far we have assumed that all option strategies involve holding a position to
expiration. Since the great majority of exchange traded options are American, carrying
with them the right of early exercise, it will be worthwhile to consider some of the
characteristics of American options. Specifically, we will want to answer two questions:

1. Given the opportunity, under what circumstances might a trader consider
exercising an American option prior to expiration?

2. How much more should a trader be willing to pay for an American option over
an equivalent European option?

In order for early exercise to be desirable, there must be some positive cash flow
which will result from early exercise, and the value of this cash must be greater than
the insurance value of the option. Because the cash flow which results from the exercise
of a stock option is significantly different from the cash flow which results from the
exercise of a futures option, the conditions under which early exercise will be desirable
are different. For this reason, we will look at these two situations separately.

FUTURES OPTIONS

From previous discussions (see Chapter 6) we know that in evaluating an option there
are some factors which make the option more valuable and there are some factors which
make the option less valuable. Consider a futures option. We might list the factors which
affect its value as follows:

option value = intrinsic value + volatility value — interest rate value

Since the intrinsic value and volatility components can never be less than zero, these
factors always enhance the option’s value. As either rises, the option value rises. Only
the interest rate component might affect the option’s value negatively. As interest
considerations rise, the option’s value falls. If the negative effects of interest rates are
greater than the positive effects of volatility, it might be possible for an option, if it is

241


--- 第 251 页 ---

242 Chapter 12

European, to be worth less than parity.! In such a case, if the option were an American
option it would become an early exercise candidate.

For example, suppose a certain futures contract is trading at 100. Suppose also that
we own an 80 call which will expire in two months, and that this option is subject to
stock-type settlement. When we evaluate the option, we find that it has a theoretical
value of 20 and a delta of 100. This means that the option has essentially the same
characteristics as the futures contract. If the option is American, and we want to
maintain the same delta position, we have three possible choices:

1. Hold the option
2. Exercise the option
3. Sell the option and buy a futures contract

Which of these choices is best?

If we choose the first alternative and hold the position, there is no change to our
account. The position we take home is identical to the one with which we begin the
next trading day.

If we choose the second alternative and exercise the 80 call, it is as if we had gone
into the futures market and purchased a futures contract at 80. Since we now have a
futures position, we are subject to futures-type settlement. If the futures contract which
we purchased at 80 settles at 100, 20 points will be credited to our account—20 points
on which we can earn interest. How much interest will we earn? That depends on the
level of interest rates as well as the amount of time remaining to expiration. If interest
rates are 6%, with two months remaining to expiration, we will earn:

20 x 2/12 x 6% = .20

Through early exercise of the option we will earn an additional .20 in interest over the
time remaining to expiration. Since no trader wants to throw away an additional profit,
exercising the option early makes better sense than simply holding the position.

What about the third choice, selling the option ourselves and buying a futures
contract? If the 80 call is trading at exactly its intrinsic value of 20 points, there is no
difference between exercising the call, or selling the call and buying a futures contract.
Both strategies will result in a 20-point credit, and over the time remaining to expiration
we will earn the same interest of .20. But suppose the 80 call is trading at a price other
than 20. Suppose it is trading at 19.50. Clearly, this price is not possible in a market
where the options are American and can be exercised at any time. Purchasing an 80
call for 19.50 is equivalent to purchasing the futures contract for 99.50. If the futures
contract is trading at 100, this means the call is trading at less than parity. If this were
indeed true, all traders would buy the call, sell the futures contract, and immediately
exercise the call. This would result in a riskless profit of 50, the amount by which the

1. Note that a European option with a theoretical value less than parity will have a positive theta. Its value
will gradually rise to parity as expiration approaches.


--- 第 252 页 ---

Early Exercise of American Options 243

option was below parity. In a market where options are subject to early exercise, no
option ought to be trading at less than parity.

What if the option is trading for more than parity, say 20.50? If we sell the 80 call
for 20.50 and buy the futures contract for 100, we will have the same position we would
have had through early exercise. But now, instead 20 points, we will have 20.50 points
credited to our account, We will realize an additional profit of 50 through the sale of
the option, as well as the slight additional interest earnings which go with it.

A trader who exercises a futures option early does so to capture the interest on the
option’s intrinsic value. This intrinsic value will be credited to his account only if the
option is subject to stock-type settlement. When he abandons the option through
exercise, he receives the variation resulting from settlement of the futures contract. If,
however, futures options are subject to futures-type settlement, as they are on many
non-U.S. exchanges, no cash flow results from the early exercise of an option. With an
80 call trading at 20 and the underlying futures contract trading at 100, if the option is
subject to futures-type settlement when exercised, 20 points will be credited to the
trader’s account from the settlement of the futures contract. But 20 points will
simultaneously be debited from his account when the 20-point value of the option
disappears. Since the cash credits and debits exactly offset each other, no additional
interest earnings can accrue.

In futures markets where the options are subject to futures-type settlement there is
never any economic justification for early exercise, and early exercise can never be an
optimal choice. A trader will always be better off either holding the option or selling it,
rather than exercising it early.

STOCK OPTIONS

Early Exercise of Calls for the Dividends

We can separate a stock option call into its components, as we did with a futures option.
Now we have the additional consideration of dividends:

call value = intrinsic value + interest rate value + volatility value — dividend value

Since the intrinsic value, interest rate, and volatility components can never be less than
zero, these factors always enhance the call’s value. As any one of them rises, the call
value rises. Only the dividend component might affect the option’s value negatively. As
the dividend rises, the call option’s value falls. If the underlying stock pays no dividend,
or no dividend is expected prior to expiration of the option, a call option can never have
a value less than parity (intrinsic value). If, however, the negative effects of the dividend
are greater than the positive effects of interest rates and volatility, it might be possible
for a call, if it is European, to be worth less than parity.

For example, suppose a certain stock is trading at 100 and that the stock will go
ex-dividend two points tomorrow. Suppose also that there is a 90 call available which
will expire in two weeks. When we evaluate the option, we find that it has a theoretical
value of 10 and a delta of 100. This means that the option has essentially the same


--- 第 253 页 ---

244 Chapter 12

characteristics as the stock. If the option is American, and we want to maintain the same
delta position, we have three possible choices:

1. Hold the option
2. Exercise the option
3. Sell the option and buy stock

Which of these choices is best?

Suppose we simply hold the option. Certainly we will maintain our delta position.
But what will happen tomorrow when the stock gives up its dividend? If the stock opens
unchanged, it will open ex-dividend at 98,2 since the two-point dividend will be
deducted from its price. Since the option has a value of parity, it will open not at 10,
the previous day’s parity price, but at 8, today’s parity price. In other words, if we hold
the option we can be certain of losing two points on our position.

Can we do any better with the second choice, exercising the option? If we exercise
the option, we will pay the exercise price of 90 for the stock, and we will discard the
10-point value of the option, effectively purchasing the stock at 100. When the stock
goes ex-dividend we will lose two points when it opens two points lower the next day,
but we will also receive the dividend since we now own the stock. We will break even
because the two-point loss on the stock price will be offset by the two-point dividend
we receive. Clearly, we are better off exercising the option than holding it, not because
we will show some additional profit, but because we will avoid a two-point loss. We
must exercise the option to ensure that we break even.

What about the third choice, selling the option and buying stock ourselves? This
seems to be very similar to early exercise. In both cases we are replacing the option with
the stock. If the option is trading at parity, in this case 10, there is no difference between
exercising the option, or selling the option and buying the stock. In each case the cash
flow will be identical and we will own the stock when it goes ex-dividend. But suppose
the 90 call is trading at a price other than 10. Suppose, for example, it is trading at
91. Clearly, this price is not possible in a market where the options are American and
can be exercised at any time. Purchasing a 90 call for 91% is equivalent to purchasing
the stock for 991. If the stock is trading at 100, this means the call is trading at less
than parity. If this were indeed true, all traders would buy the call, sell the stock, and
immediately exercise the call. This would result in a riskless profit of 14 point, the
amount by which the option was below parity. In a market where options are subject
to early exercise, no option ought to be trading at less than parity.

What if the 90 call is trading for more than parity, say 1014? Now if we sell the
option and purchase the stock we will still receive the dividend, since we will own the
stock. But we will end up with an additional 14 point which we would not have

2. On the day a stock gives up its dividend, prices are typically disseminated with the dividend already
deducted from the stock’s price. Hence, a 100-point stock which gives up a 2-point dividend overnight
and opens the next day at 98 would be deemed to have opened unchanged since the 2-point drop in
its price results from the dividend payout, not from any change in investor demand,


--- 第 254 页 ---

Early Exercise of American Options 245

collected through exercise of the call. Therefore, our third choice, selling the call and
buying the stock, is the optimum choice.

Since the only reason a trader would ever consider exercising astock option call
early is to receive the dividend, ifa stock pays no dividend there is no reason to exercise
a call early. If the stock does pay a dividend, the only time a trader ought to consider
early exercise is the day before the stock goes ex-dividend. At no other time in its life is
a stock option call an early exercise candidate.

We noted that in an American (exercise) market an option should never trade at
jess than parity. Is the same true in a European (exercise) market? In our example of
the 90 call and stock at 100, with an expected two-point dividend, the call price will
clearly drop when the stock goes ex-dividend. If the option cannot be turned into stock
through exercise prior to the ex-dividend date, the option is clearly going to lose value.
If it has very little time value, the amount it will lose when the dividend is given up may
make the option worth less than parity. In our example, if the option expires in two
weeks with interest rates at 8% and a volatility of 20%, the European value of the 90
call is approximately 81/4. This is 15% under parity, due to the fact that a call option, no
matter how deeply in-the-money, does not carry with it the right to the dividend. Only
ownership of the stock carries that right.

Early Exercise of Puts for Interest

As we did with a stock option call, we can express a stock option put’s value in terms
of its components:

put value = intrinsic value — interest rate value + volatility value + dividend value

In the case of a put, the only component that affects its value negatively is the interest
rate component. If the negative effects of interest rates are greater than the positive
effects of volatility and dividends, it might be possible for a put, if it is European, to be
worth less than parity. Consider this situation:

Stock price = 100, Time to expiration = 8 weeks, Volatility = 20%
Interest rate = 8.00%, Dividend = 0

With these assumptions, the value of a 110 call is approximately .70. Using the put/call
parity relationship, we can calculate the value of the 110 put:

put value = call value + exercise price — stock price — carrying costs
The carrying costs on the exercise price of 110 are:
110 x 56/365 x 8% = 1.35
The European put value is therefore:
.70 + 110-100 - 1.35 = 9.35

Since the 110 put is only worth 9.35 if we hold it to expiration, but is worth 10 points
if we exercise it today, the option is apparentiy worth more dead (exercised) than alive


--- 第 255 页 ---

246 Chapter 12

(unexercised). When we exercise the 100 put we get to sell stock at 110, and we can
earn interest on this 110-point credit to expiration.

Whereas a stock option call can only be an early exercise candidate on the day prior
to the stock’s ex-dividend date, a stock option put can become an early exercise
candidate anytime the interest which can be earned through the sale of the stock at the
exercise price is sufficiently large. Determining exactly when this happens is a difficult
problem, but if the stock pays a dividend it is most likely to occur on the day after the
stock goes ex-dividend. Since a put is a substitute for a short stock position, one of the
advantages of holding a put is to avoid paying the dividend. Hence, a trader will almost
always want to hold the put through the ex-dividend date. Then, if the interest
considerations are sufficient, the trader will exercise his put.

In an American (early exercise) market no put option can be trading at less than
parity. Otherwise there is an immediate arbitrage opportunity available by purchasing
the stock, purchasing the put, and immediately exercising the put. The profit will be
equal to the amount by which the put is trading at less than parity. This is not necessarily
true in a European (no early exercise} market, where the option must be carried to
expiration. In our example of the 110 put where the theoretical value derived from the
call price was 9.35 (.65 less than parity), the market in the European 110 put might be
914-914. A market maker is willing to sell the option at 914 (14 less than parity) because
he can hedge himself by selling stock, and he will be confident in the knowledge that
he will not be required to buy back the stock until expiration. The interest he earns on
the stock to expiration will more than offset the amount he will lose by selling the put
below parity.

Conditions for Early Exercise

If given the chance, there are clearly reasons why a trader might want to exercise an
American option early. In the case of futures options, when the option is subject to
stock-type settlement, the trader is trying to capture the interest on the option’s intrinsic
value. In the case of stock option calls, he is trying to capture the dividend which the
stock pays. In the case of stock option puts, he is trying to capture the interest on the
proceeds from the sale of the stock at the exercise price. From the foregoing discussion
we can infer two conditions which are necessary before a trader considers exercising an
option early to capture this additional profit:

1. The option must be trading at parity.
2. The option must have a delta close to 100.

If the option is trading at more than parity, the trader will always do better selling
the option and taking a position in the underlying market himself. Determining whether
an option is trading at parity is simply a matter of finding out what the market in that
option is. In the great majority of cases, if an option is deeply enough in-the- money to
be an early exercise candidate, the bid/ask spread is probably so wide that for practical
purposes the option is trading at parity.


--- 第 256 页 ---

Early Exercise of American Options 247

Why should the delta be close to 100? If we exercise an option early, we are trading
in the option for a position in the underlying contract. We therefore want to be
reasonably certain that the option and the underlying contract have the same charac-
teristics. In other words, we want to be certain that the option has no additional
insurance value left, so that when we exercise the option we are not throwing away
this insurance value.

For example, suppose there is an 80 call available with the underlying contract
trading at 100. If we want to take a long position we can purchase either the 80 call or
the underlying contract. If we feel there is no chance that the market can fall below 80
prior to expiration, there is no difference between holding the 80 call or holding the
underlying contract. But suppose we feel that there is some chance that the market
could fall below 80. In that case we will prefer to hold the 80 call. If the market were
to fall below 80, holding the call would limit our potential loss to the option’s premium.
If, however, we hold a long underlying position and the market drops below 80, our
potential loss is unlimited.

Recall that one interpretation of the delta is the probability that the option will finish
in-the-money. A delta close to 100 means that the underlying market has almost no
chance of going through the exercise price, and the option therefore has almost no
chance of going out-of the-money.

What degree of certainty justifies early exercise? With a delta of 100 one certainly
would consider early exercise. What about 99? 96? 90? With a delta above 95, many
traders will at least consider early exercise. How much interest will be earned, or what
dividend will be collected, through early exercise? With a delta of 95 or lower, the risk
is probably too great to consider early exercise. There is at least a 5% chance that the
underlying market will go through the exercise price. If that happens, a trader will regret
having exercised an option early, regardless of the additional benefits to be gained
through early exercise.

By ensuring that the delta is close to 100, we are also ensuring that we do not throw
away any insurance value that the option might still retain. As an option goes more
deeply into-the-money, its time value (insurance value) begins to disappear. With a delta
of 100, in theory the option has no time value left. However, as the delta declines, the
time value increases. If the delta were significantly less than 100, the option would still
retain a significant amount of time value. If we were to exercise such an option, we
would be throwing away this insurance value.

Since the desirability of early exercise is dependent, at least in part, on the option’s
delta, the accuracy of the delta is important. But there are many factors which affect the
delta, and we might incorrectly assess any one of these factors. If we feel that the correct
Volatility is 15%, an option might have a delta of 98. But if we decide to raise our
volatility to 17%, the delta of the option will decline. Under the new conditions its delta
might only be 93. At a 15% volatility a trader might consider early exercise, while ata
17% volatility he might not. For this reason, options in low-volatility markets are
exercised eatly much more often than options in high-volatility markets.


--- 第 257 页 ---

248 Chapter 12

In the same way, an option with three months remaining to expiration might have
a delta of 92, and would therefore not be an early exercise candidate. But if two months
pass, and the price of the underlying contract is unchanged, the delta will rise, and the
new delta might be 99. With three months remaining the option was not an early
exercise candidate, but with one month remaining the option might be early exercise
candidate.

Of course, we ought to ask why we were considering early exercise in the first
place. In many cases, we exercise to earn interest over the life of the option. We can
eal more interest over three months than over one month, so from this point of view
a three-month option is more likely to be an early exercise candidate than a one-month
option. We can see that many factors affect the desirability of early exercise, and these
factors can pull in different directions, with some factors dictating for early exercise and
some dictating against.

Thus far we have only addressed the question of when a trader might find it
desirable to exercise an option early. There should be an additional value associated
with an American option over an identical European option because the American
option carries with it additional rights. Even an out-of-the-money option, which no one
would consider exercising today, might someday go deeply enough into-the-money so
that it could become an early exercise candidate. This possibility should always make
an American option more valuable than a European option.

How much more should a trader be willing to pay for an American option over an
identical European option? The Black-Scholes model makes no attempt to answer this
question since it is a European pricing model. In spite of the fact that Black-Scholes
generated values are likely to show some inaccuracies in an American market, for many
years traders continued to use the model because no model with equal ease of use
existed to evaluate American options. The problem of early exercise was dealt with
through intuition, or through slight adjustments to Black-Scholes generated values. For
example, when a stock is expected to pay a dividend, an American call value can be
approximated by comparing the Black-Scholes value of the call option under two
circumstances:

1. The call expires the day before the stock goes ex-dividend.

2. The call expires on its customary date, but the underlying stock price used to
evaluate the call is the current price less the expected dividend.

Whichever value is greater is the pseudo-American call value.

In the case of options on futures, or of put options on stock, traders used
Black-Scholes generated values, but raised any option with a theoretical value less than
parity to exactly parity.

Models eventually were developed to more accurately evaluate American options.
The most widely used of these are the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, developed by John
Cox, Stephen Ross, and Mark Rubenstein; and the Whaley model, developed by
Giovanni Barone-Adesi and Robert Whaley. Unlike the Black-Scholes model, neither of


--- 第 258 页 ---

Early Exercise of American Options 249

these models is closed form. One can’t simply sit down and add up all the numbers to
get the correct value. Rather, both models are algorithms, or loops, and each time the
user makes a pass through the loop, the closer he comes to the true American value of
the option. While the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model is quite easy to understand, both
intuitively and mathematically, it may require numerous passes through the loop to
generate an acceptable value. On the other hand, the Whaley model is more complex
mathematically, but converges to an acceptable value much more quickly. The Cox-
Ross-Rubenstein model may require 40 or 50 passes through the loop to reach the same
degree of accuracy as the Whaley model achieves with four or five passes through the
loop. In addition to evaluating American options, both models also determine when an
option should be exercised early. We were somewhat vague on this point in our earlier
discussion, stating that the delta of an option should be close to 100 to justify early
exercise. When using a true American model, an option is optimally exercised early
when its theoretical value is exactly parity and its delta is exactly 100.

While the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein and Whaley models in most cases generate similar
values, more and more computer services are using the Whaley model to evaluate
American options because of the speed with which it can achieve results, However, the
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, while slower, is still very widely used because it offers
some advantages which are not available in the Whaley model. For example, the
Whaley model handles the dividend payout of a stock as if it were a continuous interest
payment over the life of the option. In reality dividends are paid all at once, and the
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model more accurately reflects the impact of this one-time pay-
ment on 4 call option on the stock. Unlike the Whaley model, the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein
model can also be used to evaluate some of the recently introduced, exotic options. Such
options are path dependent since their value depends not only on the likely price
distribution of the underlying contract at expiration, but also on the various paths which
the underlying price might take to achieve that distribution. Both these models are
discussed further in Appendix B.

Regardless of the model a trader chooses, the accuracy of model-generated values
will depend at least as much on the inputs into the model as the theoretical accuracy of
the model itself. If a trader evaluates an American option using an incorrect volatility,
or an incorrect interest rate, or an incorrect underlying price, the fact that he derives
his values from an American rather than a European model is likely to make little
difference. Both models will generate incorrect values because the inputs are incorrect.
The American model may produce less error, but that will be small consolation if the
incorrect inputs lead to a large trading loss.

American option values are most important when there is a significant difference
between the carrying cost associated with the option and the carrying cost associated
with the underlying contract. The greater the difference between the two carrying costs,
the greater the value of early exercise. When the underlying contract is a futures
contract and the option on the contract is subject to futures-type settlement, the cost of
carrying either position is, in theory, zero. This is the same as assuming an effective


--- 第 259 页 ---

250 Chapter 12

interest rate of zero. If we use a zero interest rate, there is no difference between
European and American option vatues.

When the options on a futures contract are subject to stock-type settlement, there
is a small difference between the carrying cost on the option and the carrying cost on
the underlying contract. Although che option is subject to stock-type settlement, the
price of the option is only a small fraction of the price of the underlying contract. The
additional value for early exercise is therefore small, and is only likely to show up in
deeply in-the-money options. Even in this case, the difference between European and
American values is often less than the minimum price increment. In such a market, a
trader is unlikely to profit significantly because he is using an American pricing model
while other traders are using a European pricing model. Practical considerations, such
as the accuracy of the trader’s volatility estimate, his ability to anticipate directional
trends in the underlying market, and his ability to control risk through effective
spreading strategies, will far outweigh any small advantage gained by using an American
rather than a European model.

The importance of early exercise is greatest when the underlying contract is a stock
or physical commodity.3 In such a case there is a significant difference between the
carrying cost on an option and the carrying cost on an underlying position. This
difference will especially affect the difference between European and American put
values, since early exercise will allow the trader to earn interest on the proceeds from
the sale at the exercise price. An option trader in either the stock or physical commodity
market will find that the additional accuracy offered by an American model, such as the
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein or Whaley models, will indeed be worthwhile. The significance of
this difference is shown in Figure 12-1.

THE EFFECT OF EARLY EXERCISE
ON TRADING STRATEGIES

The delta of an American option will always be greater than the delta of an equivalent
European option. The extent to which it is greater will depend on how deeply
in-the-money the option is, as well as the interest considerations resulting from early
exercise. In most cases the delta of an American option will differ only slightly from a
European option, and the possibility of early exercise is therefore unlikely to have a
significant impact on volatility or directional strategies, In the former case, a trader may
have to adjust the ratio of a strategy slightly if he wants to remain close to delta neutral.
In the latter case, a trader may find that he is a few deltas longer or shorter than he
would be if employing the same strategy with European options.

Because early exercise of an option is not automatic, there are strategies which
depend on someone making an error and not exercising an option early when he ought
to do so. For example, a stock option trader might try to execute a dividend play. This
strategy consists of buying stock and selling deeply in-the-money calls as the ex-dividend

3. Early exercise can also be an important consideration in the foreign exchange market if the interest
rates associated with the domestic currency (the currency in which the option is settled) and foreign
currency (the currency to be delivered in the event of exercise) are significantly different.


--- 第 260 页 ---

Early Exercise of American Options 251

Figure 12-1
European vs. American Put Values
Stock price = 100.00 Volatility = 25%; interest rate = 8.00%; Dividend = 0

4 weeks to expiration:

Black-Scholes Black-Scholes Cox-Ross Cox-Ross
Value Delta Value Delta
80 put 00 ie) .00 (0)
90 put 15 -6.0 15 -6.1
100 put 2.46 45.1 2.51 ~46.4
110 put 9.67 ~89.5 10.03 95.3
120 put 19.28 ~-99.4 20.00 —100.0

13 weeks to expiration:

Black-Scholes Black-Scholes Cox-Ross Cox-Ross
Value Delta Value Delta
80 put At -2.2 aa 2.3
90 put 97 -14.3 1.00 -14.9
100 put 4.00 ~41.2 4.20 44.0
110 put 10.00 -70.6 10.71 78.2
120 put 18.25 89.2 20.00 —100,0

26 weeks to expiration:

‘

Black-Scholes Black-Scholes Cox-Ross Cox-Ross
Value Delta Value Delta
80 put 46 -67 50 ~6.A
90 put 1.89 -18.4 2.02 ~-19.6
100 put 5.11 37,7 5.55 ~42.1
110 put 10.43 58.9 11.58 ~68.8
120 put 17.56 -76.4 20.04 94.8

date for the stock approaches. If the trader is not assigned on the calls, he will break
even on the stock (the stock price will fall, but he will collect the dividend). At the same
time he will profit when the deeply in-the money calls which he has sold fall by the
amount of the dividend. Of course, if he is assigned on the calls, as he ought to be, he
will only break even. But for each call which goes unexercised the trader will profit by
the amount of the dividend. Dividend plays were much more common in the early days
of option trading when the market was less sophisticated and many options which
should have been exercised were not. As markets have become more efficient, only a
professional trader, with very low transaction costs, can afford to take advantage of such
a possibility. Even then, he may find that he is assigned on the great majority of the calls
he has sold.


--- 第 261 页 ---

252 Chapter 12

A trader can execute a similar type of interest play by selling stock and simultane-
ously selling deeply in-the-money puts. Now, instead of profiting by the amount of the
dividend, the trader will profit by the amount of the interest he can earn on the exercise
price (the proceeds of the stock sale and the put sale combined). This profit will continue
to accrue as long as the puts remain unexercised. If the puts are exercised, the trader
does no worse than break even. Again, only a professional trader, with his low
transaction costs, is likely to employ such a strategy.

If options are subject to stock-type settlement, an interest play can also be done in
the futures option market by either purchasing a futures contract and simultaneously
selling a deeply in-the- money call, or selling a futures contract and simultaneously selling
a deeply in-the-money put. If the option is deeply enough in-the-money, it ought to be
exercised early. If, however, the option remains unexercised, the trader will continue
to earn interest on the proceeds from the option sale. Since the amount on which the
trader will earn interest is the difference between the exercise price and futures price,
this will not be as profitable as a similar strategy in the stock option market, where the
trader will earn interest on the exercise price. Still, if the transaction costs are low
enough, it may be worth doing.

A variation on dividend and interest plays can also be executed using deeply
in-the-money vertical spreads. For example, suppose a stock is trading at 100 with the
ex-dividend date approaching If both the 80 and 85 calls are deeply enough in-the-
money to be early exercise candidates, a trader might try to purchase the 80/85 call
vertical spread for five points. If he does so, he will exercise his 80 call in order to collect
the dividend, and at the same time hope not to be assigned on the 85 call. Oddly, if both
the 80 and 85 calls are early exercise candidates, the trader should also be willing to
sell the 80/85 call vertical for five points. If he does so, he will exercise his 85 call in
order to collect the dividend, and at the same time hope not to be assigned on the 80
call. In other words, a professional trader might logically make a market under these
circumstances of 5 bid/5 ask. He is willing to buy or sell the 80/85 call vertical at five
points. He intends to immediately exercise whichever call he buys, while hoping not be
assigned on the call which he sells.

The possibility of early exercise can also have an impact on arbitrage strategies. For
example, suppose a stock option trader executes a reverse conversion:

buy a call
sell a put
sell stock

If he executes this strategy at what he believes to be profitable prices, part of his profit
will come from the interest he expects to earn on the sale of the stock. But what will
happen if the stock price begins to fall, and in fact falls so far that the trader is assigned
on the put? This will eliminate the interest earnings, since he will be required to buy
back the stock. Of course, he can still sell the call and take in some cash. But if the value
of the call is insufficient to offset the interest loss, the trader may find that his profitable
reversal has in fact become unprofitable.


--- 第 262 页 ---

Early Exercise of American Options 253

The trader in our example is worried about being assigned on his put. If the market
drops there will be a greater likelihood of assignment; if the market rises there will be
a lesser likelihood of assignment. Since the trader prefers the market to rise, he must be
delta long. This is confirmed by the following delta values:

Stock price = 100; Time to expiration = 3 months; Volatility = 25%
Interest rate = 8.00%; Dividend = 0

European European American American
Option Value Delta Value Delta
100 call 5.97 58.8 5.97 58.8
100 put 4.00 41.2 4.20 ~44,0

If these are European options, the total delta of the reversal is:
+58.8 +41.2 -100 =0
If, however, the options are American, the total delta is:
+58.8 +44.0 ~100 = +2.8

The positive delta of 2.8 reflects a slight preference for the market to rise so that the
trader will avoid being assigned on the put.

For a similar reason, if the trader executes a conversion (sell call, buy put, buy
stock), he is 2.8 deltas short. He wants the stock to fall so that he can exercise his put
early and thereby avoid the interest costs of carrying a long stock position.

Because the desirability of early exercise, and therefore the likelihood of early
exercise, can increase or decrease as the underlying market rises or falls, conversions
and reversals using American options are not delta neutral. While these strategies may
be unbalanced by only two or three deltas, the fact that they are often done in large size
can result in an additional risk that the trader cannot afford to ignore. This also applies
to boxes and jelly rolls, which are simply combinations of conversions and reversals.
Consider these option values:

Stock price = 100; Volatility = 25%; Interest rate = 8.00%; Dividend = 0
Time to expiration: March = 3 months, June = 6 months

European European American American
Option Value Deita Value Delta
March 95 call 9.00 73.7 9.00 73.7
March 95 put 2.13 -26.3 2.24 27.8
March 100 call 5.97 58.8 5.97 58.8
March 100 put 4.00 -41.2 4.20 —-44.0
June 95 call 11.96 72.7 11.96 72.7
June 95 put 3.24 27.3 3.49 -29.9
June 100 call 9.03 62.3 9.03 62.3

June 100 put 5.11 -37.7 5.55 -42.1


--- 第 263 页 ---

254 Chapter 12

We can see how the possibility of early exercise affects the values and deltas of various
arbitrages:

European European American American

Strategy Value Delta Value Delta
March 95/100 box 4.90 0 4.99 -1.3
June 95/100 box 4.80 0 4.99 -1.8
March/June 95 jelly roll 1.85 0 1.71 +14
March/June 100 jelly roll 1.95 0 L71 +1.6

Boxes become more valuable using American options because a trader who is long
the box owns a put with a higher exercise price. If a trader buys the 95/100 box, he is
longa 95 calland a 100 put, and short a 95 put and 100 call. The 100 put will become
an early exercise candidate before the 95 put, making the American box more valuable
than the same European box. The delta of the box is negative with American options
because a trader who owns the box would like the market to decline so that he will be
able to exercise the 100 put as quickly as possible.

Jelly rolls become less valuable using American options because a trader who owns
the jelly roll has sold a long-term put. If a trader buys the March/June 00 jelly roll, he
is longa March 100 put and June 100 call, and is short a March 100 call and June 100
put. The June 100 put, being a longer term option, has more potential for early exercise
than the March 100 put. The delta of the jelly roll is therefore positive because there is
a greater danger of being assigned on the June 100 put. Hence, the trader who owns
the jelly roll would like the market to rise so that he is less likely to be assigned on the
June 100 put.

A unique, early exercise situation affecting the value of boxes can also arise in a
stock option market if there is a tender offer to buy a portion of the stock in a company.
For example, with a stock trading at 100, one would expect to see the 100/105 box
trading at close to five points. But suppose that a tender offer is made to buy half the
outstanding shares at a price of 110. A trader who owns the 100/105 box will exercise
his 100 calls in order to be able to tender stock. If he tenders 1000 shares, he might
expect half, or 500 shares, to be accepted at the tender price of 110. But after the tender
is completed, because it was for only half the outstanding shares, the stock price will
return to its pre-tender price of 100. The trader’s remaining 500 shares will still be
trading at 100. In other words, prior to the tender offer the 100 calls are worth 10, but
after the tender the 105 puts are worth a minimum of five. Of course, one cannot say
that the box is worth 15, because only half the outstanding shares are worth 110. The
other half are worth 100. Still, the 100/105 box is likely to trade for significantly more
than its usual price of five.

The possibility of early exercise can also affect arbitrage strategies in the futures
option market, but the difference between American versus European values is much
less than in the stock option market because there is less interest consideration
associated with futures options. For practical purposes, unless the options are very
deeply in-the-money or are very long-term, the difference between American and


--- 第 264 页 ---

Early Exercise of American Options 255

European vaiues for futures options is negligible. Some sample option and arbitrage
values are shown below (we assume that all options are subject to stock-type settle-
ment):

Futures price = 100; Volatility = 25%; Interest rate = 8.00%;
Time to expiration: March = 3 months, June = 6 months

European European American American

Option Value Delta Vatue Delta
March 95 call 7,60 66.9 7.67 67.5
March 95 put 2.70 ~31.2 2.73 31.3
March 100 call 4,88 51.5 4.88 51.8
March 100 put 4.88 —46.6 4.88 -46.9
June 95 call 9,27 62.2 9.34 63.5
June 95 put 4.46 -33.9 4,48 -34,2
June 100 call 6.76 51.4 6.80 52.2
June 100 put 6.76 -44.7 6.80 ~45.4
European European American American
Strategy Value Delta Value Delta
March 95 conversion 4.90 +1.9 4.94 +1.2
June 95 conversion 4.81 4+3.9 4.86 42.3
March 100 conversion 0 +19 0 +13
June 100 conversion 0 +3.9 0 +2.4
March 95/100 box 4.90 0 4.94 +.1
June 95/100 box 4.81 0 4.86 +.1
March/June 95 jelly roll 1.85 0 1.71 +11
March/June 100 jelly roll 1.95 0 171 +1.6

Many new traders seem to worry unduly about the possibility of early exercise: “If
Isell an option, what happens if] am suddenly assigned?” It is true that sometimes early
assignment can cause a loss. But there are many factors which can cause a trader to lose
money; early exercise is only one such factor. A trader should be prepared to deal with
the possibility of early exercise just as he should be prepared to deal with the possibility
of movement in the price of the underlying contract, or the possibility of changes in
volatility. Margin requirements established by the clearing houses usually require a
trader to keep sufficient funds in his account to cover the possibility of early assignment.
But this is not always true. If he is short deeply inthe-money options, an early
assignment notice may cause a cash squeeze. If this happens, he will need sufficient
Capital to cover the situation. Otherwise, he may be forced to liquidate some or all of
the remaining position. And forced liquidations are invariably losing propositions.


--- 第 265 页 ---

256 Chapter 12

An experienced trader should be able to foresee the likelihood of early exercise. He
need only ask himself: “If 1 owned this option, would I logically exercise it now?” If the
answer is “yes,” then the trader ought to be prepared for assignment. Early exercise
rarely comes as a surprise. If it does, it is probably good for the trader who was assigned.
If an option is exercised too early, someone has erroneously abandoned the time value
or protective characteristics associated with the option. When that happens, the trader
who is assigned will find that he has just received an unexpected gift.


--- 第 266 页 ---

13 %

Hedging with Options

The original justification for introducing options and futures was to enable market
participants to transfer part or all of the risk associated with holding a position in the
underlying instrument from one party to another. Options and futures act as insurance
contracts. Unlike a futures contract, an option transfers only part of the risk from one
party to another. In this respect an option acts much more like a traditional insurance
policy than a futures contract.

Even though options were originally intended to function as insurance policies,
option markets have evolved to the point where, in most markets, hedgers (those
wanting to protect an existing position), make up only a small portion of market
participants. Other traders, including arbitrageurs, speculators, and spreaders, typically
outnumber true hedgers. Nevertheless, hedgers still represent an important force in the
marketplace, and any sophisticated market participant must be aware of the strategies
hedgers use to protect their positions.

Many hedgers come to the marketplace as either natural longs or natural shorts.
Through the course of normal business activities they will profit from either a rise or fall
in the price of some underlying instrument. The producer of a commodity (grain, oil,
precious metals) is a natural long; if the price of the commodity rises, he will receive
more when he goes to sell it in the marketplace. The user of a commodity is a natural
short; if the price of the commodity falls, he will have to pay less for it when he goes to
buy it in the marketplace. In the same way, lenders and borrowers in the financial
markets are natural longs and shorts in terms of interest rates. A rise in interest rates
will help lenders and hurt borrowers. A decline in interest rates will have the opposite
effect.

Other potential hedgers come to the marketplace because they have voluntarily
chosen to take long or short positions, and now wish to lay off part or all of the risk of
that position. A speculator may have taken a long or short position in a certain contract,
but wishes to temporarily reduce the risk associated with an outright long or short
position. For example, a portfolio manager is usually paid to choose which stocks to buy
for a portfolio. He is a voluntary long. If he wants to continue to hold certain stocks, but
believes that the stocks might decline in the short term, he may find it cheaper to
temporarily hedge the stocks with options or futures than to sell the stocks and buy them
back ata later date.

As with insurance, there is a cost to hedging. The cost may be immediately apparent
because it requires an immediate cash outlay. But the cost may also be more subtle,
either in terms of lost profit opportunity, or in terms of additional risk under some

257


--- 第 267 页 ---

258 Chapter 13

circumstances. Every hedging decision is a tradeoff: what is the hedger willing to give
up under one set of market conditions in order to protect himself under another set? A
hedger with a long position who wants to protect his downside will almost certainly
have to give up something on the upside; a hedger with a short position trying to protect
his upside will have to give up something on the downside.

PROTECTIVE CALLS AND PUTS

The simplest way to hedge an underlying position using options is to purchase either a
call to protect a short position, or a put to protect a long position. In each case, if the
market moves adversely, the hedger is insulated from any loss beyond the exercise price.
The difference between the exercise price and the current price of the underlying is
analogous to the deductible portion of an insurance policy. And the price of the option
is analogous to the premium which one has to pay for the insurance policy.

For example, suppose an American firm expects to take delivery of DM 1,000,000
worth of German goods in six months. If the contract requires payment in Deutsche-
marks at the time of delivery, the American firm has automatically acquired a short
position in Deutschemarks against U.S. dollars. If the Deutschemark rises against the
dollar, the goods will cost more in dollars; if the Deutschemark falls against the dollar,
the goods will cost less. If the Deutschemark is currently trading at .60 (60¢ per DM)
and remains there for the next six months, the cost to the American firm will be
$600,000. If, however, at delivery the Deutschemark has risen to .70 (70¢ per dollar),
the cost to the American firm will be $700,000.

The American firm can offset the risk it has acquired by purchasing a call option on
Deutschemarks, for example a .64 call. If the firm wants an exact hedge, the underlying
contract will be DM 1,000,000, and the option will have an expiration date correspond-
ing to the date of delivery of the goods. If the value of the Deutschemark begins to rise
against the U.S. dollar, the firm will have to pay a higher price than expected when it
takes delivery of the goods in six months. But the price it will have to pay for
Deutschemarks can never be greater than .64. If the price of Deutschemarks is greater
than .64 at expiration, the firm will simply exercise its call, effectively purchasing
Deutschemarks at .64. If the price of Deutschemarks is less than .64 at expiration, the
firm will let the option expire worthless since it will be cheaper to purchase Deutsche-
marks in the open market.

A hedger who chooses to purchase a call to protect a short position, or a put to
protect a long position, has risk limited by the exercise price of the option. At the same
time, the hedger still maintains open-ended profit potential. If the underlying market
moves in the hedger’s favor, he can let the option expire and take advantage of the
enhanced value of his position in the open market. If, inour example, the Deutschemark
were to fall to .55 at the time of delivery, the firm would simply let the .64 call expire
unexercised. At the same time, the firm would purchase DM 1,000,000 for $550,000,
resulting in an unexpected windfall of $150,000.

There is a cost involved in buying insurance in the form of a protective call or put,
namely the price of the option. The cost of the insurance is commensurate with the


--- 第 268 页 ---

Hedging with Options 259

amount of protection afforded by the option. If the price ofa six-month .64 call is .0075
(Yc), the firm will pay an extra $7,500 (.0075 x 1,000,000) no matter what happens.
A call option with a higher exercise price will cost less, but it also offers less protection
in the form of an additional deductible amount. If the firm chooses to purchase a .66
call trading at .0025 (ae), the cost for this insurance will only be $2,500 {.0025 x
1,000,000). But the firm will have to bear any loss up to a Deutschemark price of .66.
Only above .66 is the firm fully protected. In the same way, a lower exercise price call
will offer additional protection, but at a higher price. A .62 call will protect the firm
against any rise above .62, but if the price of the call is .015 (1 42¢), the purchase of this
protection will add an additional $15,000 (.015 x 1,000,000) to the final costs.

The cost of purchasing a protective option and the insurance afforded by the
strategy is shown in Figures 13-1 (protective call] and 13-2 (protective put). Since each
strategy combines an underlying position with an option position, it follows from
Chapter 11 that the resulting protected position is a synthetic option:

short underlying + long call = long put
long underlying + long put = long call

Ahedger who buys a call to protect a short underlying position has effectively purchased
a put at the same exercise price. A hedger who buys a put to protect a long underlying
position has effectively purchased a call. In our example, if the firm purchases a .64 call
to protect a short Deutschemark position, the result is identical to owning a .64 put.

Figure 13-1: A Protective Call

A

short an underlying position

ra buy a protective call a

combined position SN



--- 第 269 页 ---

260 Chapter 13

Figure 13-2: A Protective Put

NN
Poe ~ i
a
~<_? >
, buy a protective put
“
“4
ra combined position
“4

Which protective option should a hedger buy? That depends on the amount of risk
the hedger is willing to bear, something which each market participant must determine
individually. One thing is certain. There will always be a cost associated with the
purchase of a protective option. If the insurance afforded by the option enables the
hedger to protect his financial position, the cost may be worthwhile.

COVERED WRITES

While the purchase of a protective option offers a limited and known risk, a hedger
might be willing to accept more risk in return for some other advantage. Instead of
purchasing an option to protect an existing position, a hedger might consider selling, or
writing, an option against the position. This strategy does not offer the limited risk
afforded by the purchase of a protective option but, in its favor, the strategy results in a
cash credit rather than a debit. This credit offers some, though not unlimited, protection
against an adverse move in the underlying market.

Consider a fund manager whose portfolio consists of a long position in a certain
stock. If the manager is worried about a decline in the price of the stock, he might
choose to sell a call option against the stock. The amount of protection the manager is
seeking, as well as the potential upside appreciation, will determine which call is sold,
whether in-the-money, at-the-money, or out-of-the-money. Selling an in-the-money call
offers a high degree of protection, but will eliminate most upside profit potential. Selling


--- 第 270 页 ---

Hedging with Options 261

an out-of-the-money call offers less protection but leaves room for large upside profit
potential.

For example, if the stock is currently trading at 100, the fund manager might sell
a 95 call. If the 95 call is trading at 61%, the sale of the call will offer a high degree of
protection against a decline in the price of the stock. As long as the stock declines by no
more than 61%, to 9314, the manager will do no worse than break even. Unfortunately,
if the stock begins to rise, the fund manager will not participate in the rise since the
stock will be called away when the manager is assigned on the 95 call. Still, even if the
stock rises, the manager will get to keep the 1 4-point time premium he received from
the sale of the 95 call.

If the manager wants to participate in upside movement in the stock, and is also
willing to accept less protection on the downside, he might sell a 105 call. If the 105
call is trading at two, the sale of this option will only protect him against a two-point
fall, to 98, in the price of the stock. If, however, the stock begins to rise, he will
participate point for point in this advance up to a price of 105. Above 105, he can expect
the stock to be called away.

Which option should the manager sell? Again, that is a subjective decision based
on how much risk the manager is willing to take as well as the amount of upside
appreciation in which he wants to participate. Many covered write programs involve
selling at-the-money options. Such options offer less protection than in-the-money calls,
and less profit potential than out-of-the-money options. An at-the-money option is pure
time premium. If the market sits still, a portfolio of at-the-money options have been sold
against an existing position in the underlying instrument will show the greatest
appreciation in value.

The value of typical covered writes, also known as overwrites, are shown in Figures
13-3 (covered call) and 13-4 (covered put). When the underlying is purchased and calls
are simultaneously sold against the position, a covered write is also referred to as a
buy/write. As with the purchase of a protective option, a covered write consists of a
position in the underlying and an option. It can therefore be expressed as a synthetic
position:

long underlying + short call = short put
short underlying + short put = short call

A hedger who sells a call to protect a long underlying position has effectively sold a put
at the same exercise price. A hedger who sells a put to protect a short underlying
position has effectively sold a call. In our example, if the portfolio manager sells a 100
call to protect a long stock position, the result is identical to selling a 100 put.

The purchase of a protective option and the sale of a covered option are the two
most common hedging strategies involving options. If given a choice between these
Strategies, which one should a hedger choose? In theory, the hedger ought to base his
decision on the same criteria as the pure trader: price versus value. In general, if the
price of an option is lower than its value, then the purchase of a protective call or put
makes the most sense. If the price of an option is higher than its value, then the sale of
a covered call or put makes the most sense. By comparing implied volatility to a forecast


--- 第 271 页 ---

262 Chapter {3

Figure 13-3: A Covered Call

combined position .
4
sell a covered call “
~~?
long an underlying position &
Figure 13-4: A Covered Put
Y
— combined position
NN
—
NS .
N sell a covered put
~«
_
N
Nene _
a
a short an underlying position



--- 第 272 页 ---

Hedging with Options 263

volatility, a hedger ought to be able to make a sensible determination as to whether he
wants to buy or sell options. Of course, he is still left with the choice of exercise prices.
This will depend on the amount of adverse or favorable movement the hedger foresees,
as well as the risk he is willing to accept if he is wrong.

While theoretical considerations will often play a role in a hedger’s decision,
practical considerations may also be important. If a hedger knows that he will be forced
out of business if the underlying contract moves beyond a certain price, then the
purchase of a protective option at that exercise price may be the most sensible strategy,
regardless of whether the option is theoretically overpriced.!

Most hedgers find, however, that there is a psychological barrier to buying options.
“Why should I lay out money for an option when J will probably lose the premium?”
The hedger is right. Most of the time he will lose the premium because most of the time
the option will expire worthless. But the same hed ger who refuses to purchase an option
to protect his business dealings would never consider leaving his home or family
uninsured. Like options, the great majority of insurance policies expire without claims
ever being made against them. Houses do not burn down; people live on; cars are not
stolen. That is the reason insurance companies make a profit. But the purchaser of an
insurance policy is willing to accept the fact that insurance companies make profits.
Unlike the insurance company, which is selling the insurance contract with the clear
intent of making a profit, the purchaser of an insurance contract is not purchasing the
contract to make money. He is purchasing it for the peace of mind which it affords. The
same philosophy should apply to the purchase of options. If a hedger needs the
protection afforded by the option, the purchase makes sense in spite of the fact that it
is likely to be a losing proposition in the long run.

FENCES

Suppose a hedger desires the limited risk afforded by the purchase ofa protective option,
but also wants to avoid the cash outlay associated with such a strategy. What can he
do? A popular strategy, known as a fence, is to simultaneously combine the purchase
of a protective option with the sale ofa covered option. For example, with an underlying
contract at 50, a hedger with a long position might choose to simultaneously sell a 55
call and purchase a 45 put. The hedger is insulated from any fall in price below 45, since
he can then exercise his put. At the same time, he can participate in any upward move
to 55, at which point his underlying position will be called away. The cost of the
complete hedge depends on the prices of the 45 put and 55 call. If they are the same,
the cost of the hedge is zero. If the price of the 55 call is greater than the price of the
45 put, the hedge can be established for a credit which the hedger gets to keep no matter
where the underlying finishes. With prices of 1.25 and 1.75 for the 45 put and 55 call,
the hedger will receive a credit of .50. This will reduce his break-even price on the
underlying position to 49.50.

1. Of course, if the options are wildly overpriced, a hedger might be reluctant to buy a protective option.
But this is unlikely to happen. If option prices are high, there is usually a valid reason.


--- 第 273 页 ---

264 Chapter 13

Recalling the basic synthetic relationships, we find that a long fence (long the
underlying, short a covered call, long a protective put) is simply a bull vertical spread
done synthetically. Suppose in our example fence consisting of a long 45 put and short
55 call, we replace the 45 put with its synthetic equivalent:

long 45 put = short underlying + long 45 call
45/55 fence = long underlying + long 45 put + short 55 call
= long underlying + (short underlying + long 45 call) + short 55 call
= long 45 call + short 55 call

A short fence consists of a short underlying position together with the purchase of
a protective call and sale of a covered put. Since we can always rewrite one of the
options with its synthetic equivalent, this is simply a bear vertical spread. Long and short
fences are shown in Figures 13-5 and 13-6,

Fences are popular hedging tools because they offer known protection at a low cost,
or even a credit. At the same time, they still allow a hedger to participate, at least
partially, in favorable market movement. Fences go by a variety of names: range
forwards, tunnels, cylinders; among floor traders they are sometimes known as spilt-
price conversions and reversals.

As the borrowing and lending of funds has become more widespread, and since
such activity is often based on a floating interest rate, the use of options to hedge long
or short interest rate positions has become especially popular. A firm which borrows

Figure 13-5: A Long Fence

o
a a .
Vv. sell a covered call
Se, combined position
_ ’
“
“ “
ee L —_
A LO
~"- Lae ~ 7 er soe - _
“ ™“
a“ . * sN,
a“ \ buy a protective put .
a long an underlying position -



--- 第 274 页 ---

Hedging with Options 265

Figure 13-6: A Short Fence

bined position Pa
som p — sel] a covered put a

a a

_
~a ~ ~~ -
TC . ~ a SN — ~]
~
™
uo buy a protective call ™~
> ~
NN
short an underlying position &

funds at a variable interest rate has a short interest rate position. A fall in interest rates
will reduce its cost of borrowing, while a rise in interest rates will increase its costs. To
cap the upside risk, the firm can purchase an interest rate call, thereby establishing a
maximum amount it will have to pay for borrowed funds. No matter how high interest
Tates rise, the borrower will never have to pay more than the cap’s exercise price.

An institution which lends funds at a variable interest rate has a long interest rate
position. A rise in interest rates will increase its returns, while a fall in interest rates will
reduce its returns. To set a floor on its downside risk, the institution can purchase an
interest rate put, thereby establishing a minimum amount it will receive for loaned
funds, no matter how low interest rates fall. No matter how low interest rates fall, the
lender will never receive less than the floor’s exercise price.

If a borrower (lender) simultaneously buys a cap (floor) and sells a floor (cap), he
has established a collar to his position. This is simply a fence done in the interest rate
market.

COMPLEX HEDGING STRATEGIES

Since most hedgers are not professional option traders, and have neither the time nor
desire to carefully analyze option prices, simple hedging strategies involving the pur-
chase or sale of single options are the most widely used. However, if one is willing to
do a more detailed analysis of options, it is possible to construct a wide variety of hedging


--- 第 275 页 ---

266 Chapter 13

strategies which involve both volatility and directional considerations. In order to do
this, a hedger must be familiar with both volatility and its impact on option values, and
the delta as a measure of directional risk. The hedger can then combine his knowledge
of options with the practical considerations of hedging.

Asa first step in choosing a strategy, a hedger might consider the following:

1. Does the hedge need to offer protection against a “worst case” scenario?
2. How much of the current directional risk should the hedge eliminate?
3. What additional risks is the hedger willing to accept?

A hedger who needs disaster insurance in order to protect against a “worst case”
Scenario only has a choice of which option(s) to buy. Even so, he still needs to decide
which exercise price to purchase and how many options. For example, suppose a hedger
has a long position in a certain underlying contract currently trading at 100. Suppose
also that the hedger decides to buy a put because he needs to limit the downside risk to
some known and fixed amount. Which put should he buy?

Suppose the hedger has determined that options are generally overpriced (implied
volatility is too high). Clearly, any option purchase will be to the hedgers’ disadvantage.
If his sole purpose is to hedge his downside risk without regard to upside profit potential,
he ought to avoid options and hedge himself in the futures or forward market. If,
however, he still wants upside profit potential, he must ask himself how much of a long
position he wants to retain. For example, he might be willing to retain 50% of his current
long position. This simply means that he has to purchase puts with a total delta of -50.
He can do this by purchasing one at-the-money put with a delta of —50, or several
out-of-the-money puts whose deltas add up to —50. But in a high implied volatility
market one usually tries to buy as few options as possible and sell as many options as
possible, (This is analogous to constructing a ratio vertical spread.) Hence, purchasing
one put with a delta of —-5O will be less costly, theoretically, than purchasing several
options with a total delta of -50. if the hedger wants to eliminate even more of the
directional risk, say 75%, under these circumstances he would be better off purchasing
one put with a delta of -75.

All other factors being equal, in a high implied volatility market a hedger
should buy as few options as possible and sell as many options as possible.
Conversely, in a low implied volatility market a hedger should buy as many
options as possible and sell as few options as possible.

This means that if all options are overpriced (implied volatility is too high}, and the
hedger decides he is willing to accept the unlimited downside risk that goes with the
sale of a covered call, in theory he ought to sell as many calls as possible to reach his
hedging objectives. If he is trying to hedge 50% of his long underlying position, he can
do a ratio write by selling several out-of-the-money calls with a total delta of 50, rather
than selling a single at-the-money call with a delta of 50.

There is an additional problem if one sells several calls against a single long
underlying position. Now the hedger not only has the unlimited downside risk which


--- 第 276 页 ---

Hedging with Options 267

goes with a covered call position, but he also has unlimited upside risk because he has
sold more calls than he can cover with the underlying. If the market moves up far
enough, he will be assigned on all the calls. Most hedgers want to restrict their unlimited
risk to one direction, usually the direction of their natural position. A hedger with a long
underlying position may be willing to accept unlimited downside risk, but he is probably
unwilling to accept unlimited upside risk. A hedger with a short underlying position may
be willing to accept unlimited upside risk, but he is probably unwilling to accept
unlimited downside risk. A hedger who constructs a position with unlimited risk in
either direction is presumably taking a volatility position. There is nothing wrong with
this, since volatility trading can be highly profitable. But a true hedger ought not lose
sight of what his ultimate goal is: to protect an existing position, and to keep the cost of
this protection as low as possible.

A hedger can also protect a position by constructing one-to-one volatility spreads
with deltas which yield the desired amount of protection. For example, a hedger who
wants to protect 50% of a short underlying position can buy or sell time spreads or
butterflies with a total delta of +50. Such spreads offer partial protection within a range.
The position still has unlimited upside risk, while it also retains unlimited downside
profit potential. Such volatility spreads also give the hedger the choice of buying or
selling volatility. If implied volatility is generally low, with the underlying market
currently at 100, the hedger might protect a short position by purchasing a 110 call time
spread (purchase a long-term 110 call, sell a short-term 110 call). This spread has a
positive delta and, at the same time, is theoretically attractive since the low implied
volatility makes a long time spread relatively inexpensive. If the 110 call time spread
has a delta of +25, to hedge 50% of his directional risk the hedger can buy two time
spreads for each short underlying position. Conversely, if implied volatility is high, the
hedger can consider selling time spreads. Now he will have to choose a lower exercise
price to achieve a positive delta. If he sells the 90 call time spread (purchase a short-term
90 call, sell a long-term 90 call), he will have a position with a positive delta and a
positive theoretical edge. If he wants to protect 75% of his position, and the spread has
a delta of +25, he can sell the spread three times for each underlying position.

In the same way, a hedger can also buy or sell vertical spreads to achieve a desired
amount of protection. Depending on whether options are generally underpriced or
overpriced (implied volatility is too low or too high), the hedger will work around the
at-the-money option, With the underlying market currently at 100, the hedger who
Wants to protect a long position can sell a vertical call spread with a negative delta (sell
the lower exercise price call, buy the higher exercise price call). If implied volatility is
high, he will prefer to sell an at-the-money option and buy an out-of-the-money option.
If implied volatility is low, he will prefer to sell an in-the-money option and buy an
at-the-money option. Each spread will have a negative delta, but will also have a positive
theoretical edge since the at-the-money option is the most sensitive to changes in
volatility.

As is obvious, using options to hedge a position can be just as complex as using
options to construct trading strategies. Many factors go into the decision-making
process. When a potential hedger is confronted for the first time with the multitude of


--- 第 277 页 ---

268 Chapter 13

possible strategies, he can understandably feel overwhelmed, to the point where he
decides to abandon options completely. When this happens the hedger, or someone
advising the hedger, should lay out a limited number of strategies (perhaps four or five)
which make sense, and compare the various risk/reward characteristics of the strate-
gies. Given the hedger’s general market outlook, and his willingness or unwillingness
to accept certain risks, it should then be possible to make an intelligent decision. A
summary of common hedging strategies, with some of their advantages and disadvan-
tages, is given in Figure 13-7.

PORTFOLIO INSURANCE

Suppose a hedger holds a long position in a certain asset, and he wants to protect his
holding against downward movement by purchasing a put option. Unfortunately, the
hedger finds that no option market for this asset exists. Nor is any other source, such as
an option dealer, available. Is there any way the hedger can create the put option
himself?

If the hedger were really able to purchase a put, his position would be:

long underlying + long put

But we know from the synthetic relationships in Chapter 11 that a long underlying
position together with a long put is equivalent to a long call. Therefore, the hedger really
wants to own a call with the same exercise price as the put.

What would be the characteristics of this call? We could analyze the call using a
theoretical pricing model. In order to do that, we need to know what the underlying
asset is, and then we need to determine the inputs into the model. Suppose the
underlying asset is a futures contract, and that we plan to use the following inputs:

exercise price = 100

time to expiration = 10 weeks
underlying price = 101.35
interest rate = 8%

volatility = 18.3%

Feeding these inputs into a theoretical pricing model, we find that the call option which
the hedger would like to own has a delta of 57. This means that if the hedger actually
owned the call (instead of owning the underlying asset together with a 100 put) in
theory he would have a position equivalent to owning 57% of his asset. Therefore, if he
wants to replicate the combination of the underlying asset and the 100 put, he must sell
off 43% of his holdings in the asset. When he does that, he will have a position
theoretically equivalent to owning a 100 call.

Now suppose a week passes and the value of his asset has risen to 102.26. What
would be the delta of the 100 call which the hedger desires to own? Again, feeding all
the inputs into a theoretical pricing model, we find that the call now has a delta of 62.
If the hedger wants a position which is equivalent to a long call, he now needs to own


--- 第 278 页 ---

269

abpe jeaqeioeyy eaneBou jequejod

su apisdn peywyjun

eBpe seonesoauy onnehou fenuajod

YSU apisdn paywyun

abpe feoqaioceu sanebau pequejod

SU SPISUMOP PS} /LUI|UN/\SU apisdn peywjUN

eBpea jeonaioay) onneHeu yequajod

eoud jnd spesoxe aoud |e J! Gap jequajod
woud episumop poy !uuy]

ofpe jeajeioeyy exqeBeu jequajyod

su apisdn peyuuyun

eBpe jeonaioayy enyeHou jequejod

aBpe jeoqejooy} oanebou jequajod

SU SpIsUMOP poywjUuN

aBpe jeoneioeu, oaneBou jenuajod

YSU SpIsUuMOP PSyWUN

eGpe yeajeioayy aaneBeu jenuajod

¥SU apisdn pe}iwijunpysu apIsuMOP Pa}UN

eBpe jeoneioeuy eanebeu jequejod

eld ||eo speeoxe soud ind JI Wqep jenuajod
od episdn peu

aBpe jeajoicay) eanebeu jenuajod

SU SpISUMOP PeywyUN

aBpe feoneioey) onyeHeu jenuajod
aBeyueapesig

Hedging with Options

ebpe [eojeuoeu) sanisod ‘jenuajod
wod episumop payumuN
aBpe (eoe100y) aanisod fenuajod
word sprsumop peyituqun

aGpe jeonei0ey) aAgisod jenuajod

aBpe jeojeiosy) sAnisod jenuajod

woud episdn peytujunAyoid episumop pey!WUN
sound |[2o spa8oxe goud ind JI pelo yeluajod
SU episdn pau)

eBpe seonesoeu) eagisod [enusjod

aBpe jeajaoay) aAnisod jenusjod

qyjoud apisumop payiwijun/yysu apisdn paul)
eBpe [eoaioey) eanisod jenuajod

woud episdn peyujun

eps jeojeuoey] sAnisod jenusjod

yjoud episdn payuun

eBpe jeoyal0au) sanisod jenuajod

eBpe [eojeioey) eanisod jenuejod

youd episumMop pellul|UnAyord episdn paywyun
gold jnd spasoxe soud [eo JI peso senusjod
YSU @pisuMOp paylt!|

aBpe Jeojeloeu) eAqisod jenuejod

ape [eo 6100y) SsAnisod jelnusjod

oid spisdn peywijUuNpisu sprsumop ps}!tu|
soBejueapy

peaids awn jing
peaids seaman |Inq
SUM Ind one!
aseyaind |e ones
nd e }Jas ‘feo B Ang)
g0U8} WOYys

1nd paaaoo e jes
[reo eaqosyaud & Ang
peeids eug Jesq
peoids |eoleAse98q
SIUM [eo OBI
eseyoind ind one
(reo © [Jes ‘nd eB Ang)
eouaj Buo|

EO PEUSACD B IES

ynd eaqnosjoid © Ang
ABaye.5 Bujbpey

BulAuepun
yoys

BulApepun
Buo|
uof|sog

selbeyens buibpey jo Areurwing :Z-¢) einbig



--- 第 279 页 ---

270 Chapter 13

62% of his original holding in the underlying asset. He must therefore buy back 5% of
his original holding in the asset.

Suppose another week passes and the value of the asset has fallen to 99.07. Using
the new market conditions, the 100 call would now have a delta of 46. In order to
replicate the call position, the hedger must now sell off 16% of the asset, so that he owns
only 46% of his original holding.

Notice what the hedger is doing. He is periodically rehedging his original holding
to create a position with the same delta characteristics as the call. If he continues to do
this over the ten-week period, he has, in effect, created a ten-week call at an exercise
price of 100,

The reader may have already realized that we are simply repeating the example in
Figure 5-1, but in a slightly different form. In that example, we purchased an under-
priced call and replicated the sale of the same call through a continuous rehedging
process. In our current example we are also replicating the call through a continuous
rehedging process. But here we want to purchase the call rather than sell it. All our
adjustments are therefore the opposite of those in Figure 5-1. Note also that at week ten
(expiration), instead of liquidating the position, as we did in Figure 5-1, we plan to buy
in the remainder of the asset. It was always our intention to retain our entire holding of
the asset at expiration. The replicated position in our current example is shown in Figure
13-8.

In order to replicate the call, the hedger will have to buy back some of the asset
when the market rises and sell some of the asset when the market falls. The unfavorable
adjustments (buying high, selling low) suggests that there will be a cost associated with
this rehedging process. What will the cost be? If the replication process offers the same
protection as owning a 100 put, then one might expect the cost of the replication
Process to be the same as the theoretical value of the ten week 100 put. This is indeed
the case. Using the previously listed inputs, the Black-Scholes model yields a theoretical
value for the 100 put of 2.55. This is identical to the cost of the replication process
described in Figure 13-8.

The rehedging process is an attempt to replicate the automatic rehedging charac-
teristics of the option. As a hedge against an underlying position, an option has the very
desirable characteristic of offering greater protection as the market moves adversely, and
less protection as the market moves favorably. In effect, the option automatically
rehedges itself to fit the required amount of protection. This is the influence of the
gamma on the option’s delta. When a hedger attempts to replicate the characteristics of
an option by continuously rehedging the underlying position himself, he is simply trying
to replicate the automatic rehedging (gamma) characteristics of the option. The cost of
the option, or the cost of the rehedging process, is the price the hedger pays for the
option’s gamma characteristics.

Since we need to continuously compute the delta to replicate an option through a
rehedging process, this method of replication requires us to use a theoretical pricing
model. We are therefore likely to encounter many of the same problems which we
encounter anytime we use a theoretical pricing model to evaluate an option. Is the
model itself correct? Do we have the right inputs? Leaving aside the question of the


--- 第 280 页 ---

Hedging with Options 271

Figure 13-8
% of Asset
Asset Delta of Needed for Required
Week Value 100 call Replication Adjustment
0 1014.35 57 57% sell 43%
4 102.26 62 62% buy 5%
2 99.07 46 46% sell 16%
3 400.39 53 53% buy 7%
4 400.76 56 56% buy 3%
5 103.59 74 74% buy 18%
6 99,26 45 45% sell 29%
7 98.28 35 38% sell 10%
8 99.98 50 50% buy 15%
9 103,78 93 93% buy 43%
10 102.54 100 100% buy 7%

model’s correctness, anyone wishing to use this method will have to come up with a
reasonable volatility estimate. If the volatility estimate turns out to be too high or too
low, the cost of replicating the option will be more or less than originally expected. But
notice that the cost of replication will always be the right cost. If the market is more
volatile than expected, the cost will be greater in terms of required adjustments. But the
value of the option would also have been greater. Higher volatility means a higher
theoretical value. In the same way, if the market is less volatile than expected, the cost
will be less in terms of required adjustments. The value of the option would also have
been less. Lower volatility means a lower theoretical value.

This process of continuously rehed ging an underlying position to replicate an option
position is often referred to as portfolio insurance. The method can be used to protect
any long or short position against adverse movement, but it is most commonly used by
fund managers who wish to insure the value of the securities in a portfolio against a
drop in value. For example, suppose a manager has a portfolio of securities currently
valued at $100 million. If he wants to insure the value of the portfolio against a drop in
value below $90 million, he can either buy a $90 million put, or he can replicate the
characteristics of a $90 million call, If he is unable to find someone willing to sell him
a $90 million put, he can evaluate the characteristics of the $90 million call and
continuously buy or sell the portion of his portfolio required to replicate the call position.
In effect, he has created his own put.

Unfortunately, the costs of buying and selling a large number of securities in odd
amounts may be quite high. While the concept of portfolio insurance may be attractive
from a theoretical perspective, the transaction costs may make the process too expensive
to be of practical value. Is there any way a fund manager can use portfolio insurance
while keeping transaction costs within acceptable bounds? One common method
involves using futures contracts as a substitute for the portfolio holding. If the mix of
Securities in a portfolio approximates an index, and futures contracts are available on
that index, the manager can approximate the results of portfolio insurance by purchas-
ing or selling futures contracts to increase or decrease the holdings in his portfolio. In


--- 第 281 页 ---

272 Chapter 13

the United States several index futures are available, the most popular being the futures
contract on the S&P 500 index traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Many fund
Managers use S&P 500 futures to insure their portfolios against adverse movement in
the stock market. This method is not without risk, since the S&P 500 index is unlikely
to exactly duplicate the holdings of any one portfolio. Still, the risk may be acceptable
given the reduced transaction costs.

Even if options are available on an underlying asset, a hedger may still choose to
effect a portfolio insurance strategy himself rather then purchasing the option in the
marketplace. For one thing, he may consider the option too expensive. If he believes
the option is theoretically overpriced, in the long run it will be cheaper to continuously
rehedge the portfolio. Or he may find insufficient liquidity in the option market to absorb
the number of option contracts he needs to hedge his position. Finally, the expiration
of options which are available may not exactly correspond to the period over which he
wants to protect his position. If an option is available, but expires earlier than desired,
the hedger might still choose to purchase options in the marketplace, and then pursue
a portfolio insurance strategy over the period following the option’s expiration. For all
these reasons, portfolio insurance has become an increasingly popular method of
protecting a position in an underlying asset.


--- 第 282 页 ---

a 14

Volatility Revisited

While there are many ways in which traders interpret volatility, in theory the value of
an option depends on only one volatility, the volatility of the underlying contract which
will occur over the life of the option. Of course, this volatility is unknown to a trader
since it will occur in the future. Nevertheless, if a trader wants to use a theoretical
pricing model, he will be required to make some prediction about the volatility of the
underlying contract over the life of the option.

Making an intelligent volatility forecast can be a difficult and frustrating exercise,
especially for a new option trader. The forecasting of directional price movements
through technical analysis is a commonly studied area in trading, and there are many
sources to which a trader can turn for information on this subject. Unfortunately,
volatility is a much newer concept, and there is relatively little to guide a trader. In spite
of this difficulty, an option trader must make some effort to come up with a reasonable
volatility input if he is going to rely on a theoretical pricing model to make intelligent
trading decisions.

SOME VOLATILITY CHARACTERISTICS

The first step in making a sensible volatility forecast is to understand some of the basic
characteristics of volatility. First, let’s compare two graphs. Figure 14-1 shows Deutsche-
mark prices from 1982 to 1991. Figure 14-2 shows the 50-day volatility of Deutsche-
marks over the same period. Are there any generalizations one can make from these
graphs? Obviously both prices and volatility sometimes rise and sometimes fall. But
unlike the prices of an underlying instrument, which appear to move freely in either
direction, there seems to be an equilibrium number to which the volatility always
returns. Over a period of three years, from early 1985 to late 1987, the price of
Deutschemarks rose from a low of 29 to a high of 63. While prices fluctuated after 1987,
they never reached the lows of the early 1980s. Someday, economic forces may cause
Deutschemarks to rise or fall dramatically, never again returning to prices in the 50s or
60s. In other words, prices of an underlying contract are open-ended. There is no reason
Why they have to return to some previous level.

Such does not appear to be the case with volatility. The 50-day volatility of
Deutschemarks over the 10-year period in question fiuctuated from a low of 5% to a
high of 20%. Yet no matter how much it fluctuated, at some point volatility always
Teversed itself and retraced almost all of its previous rise or fall. Indeed, we might try to
find an equilibrium volatility such that there are equal fluctuations above and below this

273


--- 第 283 页 ---

274

1661

, O661

6861
L

: 8861

; 2861

j 9861

S861 ve6l e86l ce6l
4 1 i 1

SZ

0€

Ov

Sp

OS

Wd Jed sjuay

Ss

a9

So

OL
L661-Z861 S0o}ig YABWIEYISIN|G :}-pL anbi4



--- 第 284 页 ---

Volatility Revisited 275

number. In the case of Deutschemarks, this equilibrium volatility seems to be about 11%
to 12%. Volatility may rise well above 12%, or fall well below 11%, but eventually it
always seems to return to this area.

If we were to generalize about volatility characteristics from the Deutschemark
volatility in Figure 14-2, we might surmise that an underlying contract is likely to have
a typical long-term average, or mean volatility. Moreover, the volatility of the underlying
contract appears to be mean reverting. When volatility rises above the mean, one can
be fairly certain that it will eventually fall back to its mean; when volatility falls below
the mean, one can be fairly certain that it will eventually rise to its mean. There is a
constant gyration back and forth through this mean.

This mean reverting characteristic of volatility can also be seen in Figure 143,
which shows the distribution of Deutschemark volatility from 1982 to 1991. Beginning
at the extreme left on the x-axis (the amount of time remaining to expiration), we can
see that over any two-week period during the 10 years in question, there was a 20%
chance that volatility would be either less than 6.0% or greater than 17.3% (the 10th
and 90th percentiles}. There was a 50% chance that volatility would be either less than
7.6% or greater than 13.0% (the 25th and 75th percentiles]. The mean volatility for any
two week period was 9.7%. Moving to the extreme right on the x-axis, we can see that
over any 50 week period there was a 20% chance that volatility would be either less
than 9.8% or greater than 14%. There was a 50% chance that volatility would be either
less than 10.6% and greater than 12.7%. The mean volatility for any 50-week period
was about 11.5%.

Figure 14-3 has an easily identifiable structure. As one moves further out in time
the percentile lines tend to converge towards the mean, and the mean becomes stable.
This reinforces the assumption that volatility is indeed mean reverting, This type of
volatility graph, sometimes referred to as a volatility cone, is an effective method of
presenting the volatility characteristics of an underlying instrument.!

What else can we say about volatility? Looking at the more detailed Deutschemark
volatility chart in Figure 14-4, we might surmise that volatility has some trending
characteristics. From July 1989 through June 1990 there was a downward trend in
volatility. From July 1990 to April 1991 there was an upward trend. And from April
1991 to October 1991 there was again a downward trend. Moreover, within these
major trends there were minor trends as volatility rose and fell for short periods of time.
In this respect volatility charts seem to display some of the same characteristics as price
charts, and it would not be unreasonable to apply some of the same principles used in
technical analysis to volatility analysis. It is important to remember, however, that while
price changes and volatility are related, they are not the same thing. If a trader tries to
apply exactly the same rules of technical analysis to volatility analysis, he is likely to find
that in some cases the rules have no relevance, and that in other cases the rules must
be modified to take into account the unique characteristics of volatility. Since the author

1. For amare detailed discussion of volatility cones, see:
Burghardt, Galen and Lane, Morton; “How to Tell if Options are Cheap”; The Journal of Portfolio
Management, Winter 1990, pages 72-78.


--- 第 285 页 ---

276

166}

O661

6861

8861

2861

9861

Se6l ps86l e86l cB6l
4 ¢

(%) AUIBEIOA

ce

L661-z96l AmNe|oA YaeWeYosineg Aeq-os :z-1 eunbiy



--- 第 286 页 ---

a

277

uoneldxy 0} sysay,
OS lb bY ly 86 SE ce 62 9 E26 OC Lb Pl Lb g $ ro

1. 1 L 1 4 1 1 L L i 1 1 i i it 9
Le
aynuadied WOL
io
aHUsIIdd UIST
<
Qo
ueipayy Lap 2.
Z
SS
B|NUSIIBd UIGL
FH bl
af}uso19q YIOG
9L
km]
g
g
At Dal
Re
= 8h
3
= 1661-2861 UORNqIysig AWWe}oA yseWaYyosineg :e-p1L enbl4



--- 第 287 页 ---

Chapter 14

278

26-uer

L6-des

b6-unt

16-994

06290

o6-Inr

o6-eA = 6g-AON «S6g-ENY 6 B-dy sn
1 i

8
Ol
<
o
2
z=
Zz
Ss
vb
OL
8

1661-686 L Anejo, YseWaYyosjneg Aeg-0S :F-r1 esnBi4



--- 第 288 页 ---

Volatility Revisited 279

claims no particular expertise in the area of technical analysis, the reader is left to his
own devices in this regard.

VOLATILITY FORECASTING

Given the volatility characteristics that we have identified, how might we go about
making a volatility forecast? First we need some volatility data. Suppose we have the
following historical volatility data on a certain underlying instrument;

last 30 days 24%
last 60 days 20%
last 120 days 18%
last 250 days 18%

Certainly, we would like as much volatility data as possible. But if this is the only data
available, how might we use it to make a forecast? One method might be to simply take
the average volatility over the periods which we have:

(24% + 20% + 18% + 18%) / 4 = 20%

Using this method, each piece of data is given identical weight. Might it not be
reasonable to assume that some data is more important than other data? A trader might
assume, for example, that the more current the data, the greater its importance. Since
the 24% volatility over the last 30 days is clearly more current than the other volatility
data, perhaps 24% should play a greater role in our volatility forecast. We might, for
example, give twice as much weight to the 30-day data as to the other data:

(40% x 24%) + (20% x 20%) + (20% x 18%) + (20% x 18%) = 20.8%

Our forecast has gone up slightly because of the extra weight given to the more recent
data.

Of course, if it is true that the more recent volatility over the last 30 days is more
important than the other data, it follows that the volatility over the last 60 days ought
to be more important than the volatility over the last 120 days and 250 days. It also
follows that the volatility over the last 120 days must be more important than the
volatility over the last 250 days. We can factor this into our forecast by using a regressive
Weighting, giving more distant volatility data progressively less weight in our forecast.
For example, we might calculate:

(40% x 24%) + (30% x 20%} + (20% x 18%) + (10% x 18%} = 21.0%

Here we have given the 30-day volatility 40% of the weight, the 60-day volatility 30%
of the weight, the 120-day volatility 20% of the weight, and the 250-day volatility 10%
of the weight.

We have made the assumption that the more recent the data, the greater its
importance. Is this always true? If we are interested in evaluating short-term options, it
May be true that data which covers short periods of time is the most important. But
Suppose we are interested in evaluating very long-term options. Over long periods of


--- 第 289 页 ---

280 Chapter 14

time the mean reverting characteristic of volatility is likely to reduce the importance of
any short-term fluctuations in volatility. In fact, over very long periods of time the most
reasonable volatility forecast is simply the long-term mean volatility of the instrument.
Therefore the relative weight we give to the different volatility data will depend on the
amount of time remaining to expiration for the options in which we are interested.

Ina sense, all the historical volatility data we have at our disposal are current data;
they simply cover different periods of time. How do we know which data is the most
important? In addition to the mean reverting characteristic, volatility also tends to
exhibit serial correlatton. The volatility over any given period is likely to depend on, or
correlate with, the volatility over the previous period, assuming that both periods cover
the same amount of time. If the volatility of a contract over the last four weeks was 15%,
the volatility over the next four weeks is more likely to be close to 15% than far away
from 15%. We can again use the weather analogy from Chapter 4. If the high
temperature yesterday was 25°, and we had to guess what the high temperature today
would be, a guess of 30° would make more sense than a guess of 50°. Once we realize
this, we might logically choose to give the greatest weight to the volatility data covering
a time period closest to the life of the options in which we are interested. That is, if we
are trading very long-term options, the long-term data should get the most weight. If we
are trading very short-term options, the short-term data should get the most weight. And
if we are trading intermediate-term options, the intermediate-term data should get the
most weight.

Suppose we are interested in evaluating six-month options. How should we weight
our data? Since 120 (trading) days is closest to six months, we can give the 120-day data
the greatest weight, and give other data correspondingly lesser weight:

(15% x 24%} + (25% x 20%) + (35% x 18%} + (25% x 18%} = 19.4%

Alternatively, if we are interested in 10-week options, we can give the greatest
weight to the 60-day volatility data:

(25% x 24%) + (35% x 20%) + (25% x 18%) + (15% x 18%] = 20.2%

In the foregoing examples we used only four historical volatilities, but the more
volatility data which is available, the more accurate any volatility forecast is likely to be.
Not only will more data, covering different periods of time, give a better overview of
the volatility characteristics of an underlying instrument, but it will enable a trader to
more closely match historical volatilities to options with different amounts of time to
expiration. In our example we used historical volatilities over the last 60 days and 120
days as approximations to forecast volatilities for six-month and 10-week options.
Ideally, we would like historical data covering exactly a six-month period and exactly a
10-week period.

The method we have described is one which many traders intuitively use to
forecast volatility. It depends on identifying the typical characteristics of volatility, and
then projecting a volatility over the forecasting period. Theoreticians have recently tried
to take essentially the same approach to volatility forecasting, and this has led to the
development of autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) and generalized


--- 第 290 页 ---

Volatility Revisited 281

autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) volatility models. A detailed
discussion of such models is beyond the scope of this text, since they can be mathemati-
cally complex and are not widely used among traders. Nevertheless, an option trader
should be aware that these models do exist, and that they are simply an attempt to apply
the mean reverting and serial correlation characteristics of volatility to volatility forecast-
ing.”
. Thus far we have focused only on the historical volatility characteristics of the
underlying instrument in trying to forecast a volatility. Is there any other information
which might be useful? No individual trader can hope to know everything affecting
price changes in an underlying contract. Perhaps there are factors which could affect
the future volatility, but about which the trader is unaware. If one believes that such
information is likely to be reflected in the prices of the contracts being traded, one way
to ferret out additional volatility information is to look at the prices of options. In other
words, a trader will want to look at the implied volatility in the marketplace to find the
consensus volatility. Once he has done this, he will want to use this information in any
volatility forecast he intends to make.

How much weight should a trader give the implied volatility? Some traders
subscribe to the efficient market principle, and believe that the implied volatility is
always the best volatility forecast since it reflects all available information. Most traders
believe, however, that while the implied volatility is important, it isn’t the whole story.
Typically, a trader might give the implied volatility a weighting somewhere between
25% and 75% in making a volatility forecast. How much depends on the trader’s
confidence in forecasting a volatility based on historical volatility data? If a trader feels
very confident about his forecast, he might give the implied volatility as little as a 25%
weight; if he feels uncertain about his forecast, he might give the implied volatility as
much as a 75% weight. Of course, his confidence level will depend on his experience,
as well as how conclusive the historical data is.

For example, suppose a trader has made a volatility forecast of 20% based on
historical data, and that the implied volatility is currently 24%. If the trader decides to
give the implied volatility 75% of the weight, his final forecast will be:

(75% x 24%) + (25% x 20%) = 23%

On the other hand, if the trader decides to give the implied volatility 25% of the weight,
his final forecast will be:

2. For further information an ARCH and GARCH models see:

Engle, R.F., “Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedaticity with Estimates of the Variance of United
Kingdom Inflation,” Econometrica, Vol. 50, Na. 4, 1982, pages 987-1000.

Bollerslev, T., “Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteraskedasticity,” Journal of Economics,
No. 31, April 1986, pages 307-327.

Bollerslev, T., “A Conditional Heteroskedastic Time Series Model for Speculative Prices and Rates of
Return,” Review of Economics and Statistics, No. 69, August 1987, pages 542-547,

Nelson, David B., “Conditional Heteraskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach,” Econometrica,
No. 59, 1991, pages 347-370

Kuberek, Robert C., “Predicting Interest Rate Volatility: A Conditional Heteroskedastic Model of
Interest Rate Movements,” Journal of Fixed Income, Vol. 1, No. 4, March 1992, pages 21-27.


--- 第 291 页 ---

282 Chapter 14

(25% x 24%) + (75% x 20%) = 21%

Finally, if the trader decides to give the implied volatility half the weight, his final
forecast will be:

(50% x 24) + (50% x 20) = 22%

A PRACTICAL APPROACH

No matter how painstaking a trader’s method, he is likely to find that his volatility
forecasts are often incorrect, and sometimes to a large degree. Given this difficulty,
many traders find it easier to take a more general approach. Rather than asking what
the correct volatility is, a trader might instead ask, given the current volatility climate,
what’s the right strategy? Rather than trying to forecast an exact volatility, a trader will
try to pick a strategy that best fits the volatility conditions in the marketplace. To do this,
a trader will want to consider several factors:

1, Whatis the long-term mean volatility of the underlying contract?
What has been the recent historical volatility in relation to the mean volatility?
What is the trend in the recent historical volatility?

2

3

4, Where is implied volatility and what is its trend?

5. Are we dealing with options of shorter or longer duration?
6

How stable does the volatility tend to be?

For example, suppose there are ten weeks (approximately 50 trading days) to
expiration and we are trying to decide on an appropriate volatility strategy. To make a
decision, we might look at the 50-day historical volatility (the historical volatility which
corresponds to the amount of time remaining to expiration), its relationship to the
long-term mean volatility, and of course the implied volatility. Having done this, suppose
we find the conditions shown in Figure 14-5A. What are our conclusions?

Clearly we are coming off a period of high volatility and seem to be moving
downward. The recent 50-day historical volatility (approx. 20.6%} is still above the
long-term historical mean (approx. 18.7%), so there is reason to believe that the
volatility will continue to decline. The implied volatility is also declining, but still
appears to be about 1% percentage points higher (22.1%} than the 50-day historical
volatility. All volatility conditions seem to be pointing in the same direction. The
historical volatility is above the mean but declining, and the implied volatility is above
the historical volatility and also declining. A short volatility position (negative
gamma/negative vega] is strongly indicated.

There are of course a variety of short volatility strategies available, and the best
strategy will still depend on a trader’s experience in the market and the amount of risk
he is willing to take. Suppose we have additional volatility data (perhaps a volatility cone
of the type in Figure 14-3) showing that the 50-day volatility can easily vary by as much
as 10 percentage points. We still want to sell volatility, but given this instability and the


--- 第 292 页 ---

283

—=—___§—\—._ ainjn4 jsed = _
os Or oe oz = =OL 0) ol- 02 8608 = =60e SiS siti ss
L Jt — 1 H pop 1d gL

AyyejoA ual We} Buc]

uolyesidxa

Ayyyejoa
paidut

Ayjne|on jeouoisiy lz §
hep og By
E
ze
€2e
ve
se

Volatility Revisited

eg-p) anbi4



--- 第 293 页 ---

284 Chapter 14

fact that implied volatility at 22.2% is only slightly above the 50-day historical volatility,
perhaps the wisest choice is a less risky strategy such as the purchase of butterflies. If a
riskier strategy is chosen, perhaps it should be done only in small size. On the other
hand, if implied volatility is currently 25% and we find that the volatility tends to be
quite stable, varying only five or six percentage points for any 50-day period, a trader
may be willing to take ona much riskier position, perhaps selling a straddles or strangles.

In real life the situation is rarely as simple as in Figure 14-5A. For example, consider
Figure 14-5B. Now the historical volatility is above the historical mean and declining,
but the implied volatility has already moved ahead of the historical volatility. A trader
may still choose a short volatility position, but he is unlikely to have the same degree of
confidence. Indeed, the situation may be even more confused. Suppose the historical
volatility is above the long-term mean but seems to be increasing (Figure 14-5C}. Or
suppose implied volatility is moving in the opposite direction of the historical volatility
(Figure 14-5D}. In each of these situations some factors dictate one type of position,
while other factors dictate a different position,

Consider the situation in Figure 14-6A where we are thinking of taking a position
in six-week options (approximately 30 trading days}. The 30-day historical! volatility,
currently at 15.8%, is well above the long-term mean of 11.2%. However, the trend in
volatility seems to be up, and there is no telling how long it will take for the volatility
to revert to its mean of 11.2%. The current implied volatility of 14.6% is also well above
the long term mean volatility, but is lower than the 30-day historical volatility.
Corresponding to the upward trend in historical volatility, there also seems to be an
upward trend in the implied volatility. With so many contradictory signals, a trader is
unlikely to have a strong opinion about whether he should buy or sell volatility. He may
choose to take no position at all, preferring to wait for clearer indications.

Suppose, in addition to six-week options, we also have available 19-week options
(approximately 95 trading days). Volatility data for this contract is shown in Figure
14-6B. While a trader may be hesitant to take a position in six-week options alone, when
combined with {9-week options, he may be able to construct a strategy with much more
acceptable risk characteristics. Here the 95-day historical volatility of 12.6% is above the
11.2% mean volatility. Moreover the current implied volatility of 19-week options, at
14.5%, is well above both the 95-day historical volatility and the long-term mean
volatility. There is a much better chance that the volatility will revert to its mean over
a 19-week period than over a six-week period, so there are much stronger reasons for
taking a short volatility position in 19-week options than in six-week options. Still, the
upward trend in both the historical and implied volatilities will cause some worry if we
do take a short volatility position. However, if we were to simultaneously take a long
volatility position in six-week options, we would at least be protected against a
continuing increase in the volatility of the underlying contract over the next six weeks.
By creating a short time spread (buy six-week options/sell 19-week options) we can take
a position which should be profitable based on our knowledge of volatility’ charac-
teristics, but which also has acceptable risk characteristics if we are wrong.

A short time spread will not eliminate every risk. The market might suddenly
become very quiet, with historical volatility quickly dropping to, or even below, its


--- 第 294 页 ---

285

Volatility Revisited

—3—_——_————— aning

09 oS

segQ__ <<
[¢] OL- O¢- oe- Or- os- 09- Ol- og- 06-
es es Seen ee i it |

uolyesidxe

Ayiyejon ueSwW We}

rd

Aquye|on
paldui

€Z

Ayyqejoa jeouoysiy
Aep og

SZ

(%) AUIReIOA

qS-pL aunbig


--- 第 295 页 ---

286

uoneudxa

0%

eunjin4
Ol

ie]

1sed
Ob

Oe- OE- Or- os- og-

—_______L

Ayiyejoa yeou0ysi4
Aep os

Ayye|on
paydu

(%) Auireion

9S-P1 einBi4


--- 第 296 页 ---

287

Volatility Revisited

~- aunyn4 Sq

Os OF 0€ 02 OL 0 0 ‘a Oe de- Ov- Os- Q9-

“Ayngejon ues Wwe} Bu]

uoyendxa

Ayejon
perdu

AYFEIOA peooysty
Kep og

zs
g
5
zz 3
£z
vz
se
ps-p eunfily



--- 第 297 页 ---

288

Chapter 14

02

0 OlL- 02- Oe- Ov- os- O9- O4- o8- 06-

nn Ee
~<q— aimny sed
OL

LoL
thE
a Sa TCA Ta <
ay
rf ad
<
&
€l
(suondo yaem 9) Aqne|OA pal|duul vt
St
9
e9-p) einBi4


--- 第 298 页 ---

289

Volatility Revisited

Oe

~<_q— oininy
ob

(e)

ye

OL-
L

0¢-
i

o€- Ov- 0s oo- o2-
L 1

og-

06-

Ayqejoa jeouoysly Aep 6

(suondo yaem Gt) Ayjiqejoa parjduut -

[OA UBB

rob

eb

vt

St

SL

(%) Ayae}OA,

q9-h). aunBig


--- 第 299 页 ---

290 Chapter 14

long-term mean. At the same time, implied volatility may remain relatively high. Such
conditions will do the most damage to a short time spread. Still, if we believe that the
implied volatility tends to follow the historical volatility, we may conclude that it is
unlikely that the implied volatility will stay high if the historical volatility drops.

A trader will always attempt to pick the strategy which best fits his opinion of
market conditions, whether a directional opinion or a volatility opinion. Given the fact
that there is such a wide variety of market conditions, a trader who is familiar with the
greatest number of strategies will have the best chance of surviving and prospering. He
will be in a position to pick strategies with the best risk/reward characteristics, strategies
which will be profitable when things go right, but which won’t give back all the profits
when things go wrong. This skill comes not only from a technical knowledge of option
evaluation and theory, but also from a practical knowledge of what really happens in
the marketplace.

SOME THOUGHTS ON IMPLIED VOLATILITY

Since many option strategies are sensitive to changes in implied volatility, and since
implied volatility will often play a role in forecasting the volatility of the underlying
contract, it may be worthwhile to consider some of the characteristics of implied
volatility.

Implied versus Historical Volatility

Implied volatility can be thought of as a consensus volatility among all market partici-
pants with respect to the expected amount of underlying price fluctuation over the
remaining life of an option. In the same way that an individual trader is likely to change
his volatility forecast in response to changing historical volatility, it is logical to assume
that the marketplace as a whole will also change its consensus volatility in response to
changing historical volatility. As the market becomes more volatile, implied volatility
can be expected to rise; as the market becomes less volatile, implied volatility can be
expected to fall. Market participants are making the logical assumption that what has
happened in the past is a good indicator of what will happen in the future.

The influence of historical volatility on implied volatility can be seen in Figure 14-7,
the historical and implied volatility of U.S. Treasury Bond futures traded on the Chicago
Board of Trade from 1989 to 1991. In late 1989, and again in mid-1991, there were
declines in the volatility of Treasury Bond futures, and these were accompanied by
corresponding declines in implied volatility. From August 1990 through January 1991
(the period of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait), there were several sharp increases in the
volatility of the futures, and these were accompanied by similar increases in implied
volatility. Clearly, the marketplace, in the form of changing implied volatility, was
responding to the changing historical volatility of the underlying contract.

Notice, however, that the fluctuations in implied volatility were usually less than
the fluctuations in historical volatility. When the historical volatility declined, the
implied volatility rarely declined by an equal amount. And when historical volatility
increased, the implied volatility rarely increased by an equal amount. Because volatility


--- 第 300 页 ---

291

Volatility Revisited

e6-uer

16-des

ke-unr = 16-484 06-190
LL 1 L

o6-Inr
_!

o6ueW
1

68-A0N 6e-Bny
—__1_

Aypejon eouoysiy Aep 02

Ayyeloa pardut

6sudy

6e-uer
v

AWNEIOA Saunyng puog Ainseadl :Z-pL einbig

a

St

(%) ANINEIOA


--- 第 301 页 ---

292 Chapter 14

tends to be mean reverting, when historical volatility is above its mean there is a greater
likelihood that it will decline, and when historical volatility is below its mean there is a
greater likelihood that it will increase.

Moreover, the further out in time we go, the greater the likelihood that the
volatility of the underlying contract will return to its mean. (Look again at Figure 14-3.)
Consequently, the implied volatility of long-term options tends to remain closer to the
mean volatility of an underlying contract than the implied volatility of short-term
options. As historical volatility rises, the implied volatility of all options is likely to rise.
But given the stronger mean reverting characteristics of volatility over long periods of
time, the implied volatility of long-term options will tend to rise less than the implied
volatility of short-term options. As historical volatility falls, the implied volatility of all
options is likely to fall. But the implied volatility of long-term options will tend to fall
less than the implied volatility of short-term options. This is born out by Figure 14-8,
the implied volatility of Treasury Bond options for various expiration months from
September 1990 to May 1991. Note the increase in implied volatilities during January
1991. But the increase in the implied volatility of the short-term contract (March) was
much greater than the increase in the implied volatility of the mid-term (June) contract,
which was in turn greater than the increase in the implied volatility of the long-term
(September) contract. When implied volatility began to decline in late January 1991 the
roles were reversed. The March contract declined the most rapidly, followed by the June
contract, and the September contract. This is typical of the way in which implied
volatility tends to change in response to changing volatility environments.

Over long periods of time the historical volatility of the underlying contract will be
the dominant factor affecting implied volatility. Over short periods of time, however,
other factors can also play a significant, perhaps even a dominant, role. If the market-
place foresees events which could cause the underlying contract to become more
volatile, anticipation of these events might cause implied volatility to change in ways
that are not necessarily consistent with historical volatility. For example, government
reports on economic conditions are issued periodically, and these reports have been
known to contain surprises for the interest rate and foreign exchange market. This
potential for surprise can cause uncertainty in the marketplace, and this uncertainty is
often reflected in an increase in implied volatility. Going into government reports, there
is a strong tendency for implied volatility to rise, even in the face of low historical
volatility in the underlying instrument.

Government reports are not the only factors which add uncertainty to the market.
Any future events which could have unexpected consequences can have an effect on
implied volatility. In the currency markets, upcoming meetings of finance ministers—or
in the energy markets upcoming OPEC meetings—often cause implied volatility to rise.
In the stock option market, earnings news, the potential success or failure of new
products, or (most dramatically) the possibility of a takeover, can all cause increases in
implied volatility, regardless of the historical volatility of the stock.

Ina similar way, if the marketplace believes that no significant events are likely to
occur in the foreseeable future, uncertainty is removed from the market. In such a case
the implied volatility may start to fall, even if the actual historical volatility has been


--- 第 302 页 ---

293

Volatility Revisited

16-JeW }6-Ge4 1e-uer 06-98q 06-AON 06-90 a6-des 06-Bny o6-inr
aL _ me 4 tL a 9

166 | sequiajdes

1661 eunr

—
“
(%) Ane|on payduyy

el

vl

066} Joquiscsq

1

0661 Jequiajdag
91

1661 YoEW

Zt >
Aypye[oA peljduy seanjng puog Ainseas, :g-p1) eunbig



--- 第 303 页 ---

294 Chapter 14

relatively high. This is why implied volatility sometimes drops right after large moves in
the underlying contract. Once the big event has occurred, there may be a perception
that all the uncertainty has been removed from the market.

Regardless of short-term changes in implied volatility, it is still important fora trader
to remember that the volatility of the underlying contract will eventually overwhelm
any considerations of implied volatility. As an example, consider the following situation:

futures price = 97.73

time to expiration = 60 days
interest rate = 6%

implied volatility = 20%

Given these conditions, the 100 call would be trading for 2.17, with an implied delta
of 40. Suppose we create a delta neutral position by purchasing ten 100 calls for 2.17
each, and selling four futures contracts at 97.73. What will happen to our position if
implied volatility rises to 22%?

If implied volatility immediately goes to 22%, the new price of the 100 call wilt be
2.47, and we will show a profit of

10 x (2.47 - 2.17) = +3.00

Suppose, however, that the increase in implied volatility occurs very slowly, over a
period of 20 days, and during this period the price of the underlying futures contract
remains at 97.73. Under these conditions, even if implied volatility rises from 20% to
22%, the 100 call will now be worth only 1.87. Our position will then show a loss of

10 x (1.87 ~ 2.17} = -3.00

Even though the implied volatility increased, the fact that the underlying futures
contract failed to make any significant move resulted in the option’s price declining.
Now suppose we have the same position (long ten 100 calls, short four futures
contracts) but this time instead of rising to 22%, the implied volatility drops to 18%.
What will be the effect on our position?
If implied volatility immediately drops to 18%, the new price of the 100 call will
be 1.86, and we will show a loss of

10 x (1.86 - 2.17) =-3.10

Suppose, however, that the decline in implied volatility is accompanied by a swift move
in the underlying contract. If the underlying futures contract falls to 93.00, and implied
volatility falls to 18%, the price of the 100 call will be 59, and we will show a profit of

4 x (97.73 — 93.00) — 10 x (2.17 — 59) = +3.12

On the other hand, if the underlying futures contract rises to 102.50 while implied
volatility falls to 18%, the price of the 100 call will be 4.32, and we will again show a
profit

4 x (97.73 - 102.50) + 10 x (4.32 - 2.17) = +2.42


--- 第 304 页 ---

Volatility Revistted 295

In both cases the movement in the underlying contract has more than offset any decline
in the option’s price due to a decline in implied volatility.

The foregoing examples are of course simplified. As market conditions change-an
active trader may very well make adjustments to his position in order to remain delta
neutral. If so, the actual profit or loss will be affected by the cash flow from this
adjustment process. The important point is that the volatility of the underlying contract,
whether the contract moves or sits still over time, will eventually overwhelm any
changes in implied volatility. This is not to say that implied volatility is unimportant.
The price of a contract is always an important consideration in making trading decisions.
But in order to trade intelligently, we need to know value as well as price. The value of
an option is determined by the volatility of the underlying contract over the life of the
option.

Implied versus Future Volatility

If, as many traders believe, prices in the marketplace reflect all available information
affecting the value of a contract, the best predictor of the future volatility ought to be
the implied volatility. Just how good a predictor of future volatility is implied volatility?
While it would be impossible to answer this question definitively, since that would
require a detailed study of many markets over long periods of time, we might still gain
some insight by looking at a limited number of examples.

Clearly, no one knows the future volatility. We can, however, record the implied
volatility at any moment in time and then, when expiration arrives, look back and
calculate the actual volatility of the underlying contract between the time we recorded
the implied volatility and expiration. We can do this every day during an option’s life,
recording the implied volatility and then at expiration calculating the actual volatility
that occurred over this period. This has been done in Figures 1 4-9A, 9B, and 9C for the
June 1992, March 1993, and December 1993 options on Treasury Bond futures. It is
admittedly dangerous to generalize from such limited data, but are there any conclu-
sions we might draw from these graphs?

We can see that with a great deal of time remaining to expiration, the future
volatility of the underlying contract (the solid line) is relatively stable. But as we get
Closer to expiration the future volatility can become much less stable. This is logical if
We again recall that the mean reverting characteristics of volatility are much less certain
over short periods of time than over long periods. One large move in the underlying
contract with only several days remaining to expiration will result in a sharp increase in
the volatility to expiration (see Figure 14-9C). On the other hand, if the underlying
contract is relatively quiet over the last several days in an option’s life, the volatility to
expiration will collapse (see Figure 14-9B).

How does the marketplace react to these volatility characteristics? With long
periods of time remaining to expiration, the volatility to expiration is relatively stable.
One would therefore expect the implied volatility to also be relatively stable. Con-
versely, with short periods of time remaining to expiration, the volatility to expiration
Can be very unstable, and one would therefore expect the implied volatility to be
unstable. These conclusions are born out by the implied volatility (the broken line) in


--- 第 305 页 ---

296

26-Aew
—ee

26-1dy

¢ SPW

¢ ened

6 ver 16990 16-AON

16-20
1

L6-das

uolyedidxe 2661 eunr
oO} Aipejoa penjoe

suondo g66} aunr
Ayyye}OA patjduu

L6-Bny
9

(9%) AWneIOA

tL

ral
ee-rh aunbiy



--- 第 306 页 ---

297

Volatility Revisited

€6-qa4 e6-uer 26-03) 26-AON e690 ze-deg z6-Bny 26-1n¢ e6-unr
n Lt 1 — -L am L 9

ualeadxe e661 Yue
0} Aupejoa yenioe

(%) ANINBIOA

suohdo 6661 4Yueyy
Ayve}on payduu

ral
q6-r}. e1nb)4


--- 第 307 页 ---

e6-Bny e6e-inr e6-unr c6-Aew e6-1dy e6eW
fl 1 +g

€6-AON 66200 e6-dag
1 1 | lL .

Chapter 14

uolyesidxe E66 | Jequieoeq
0} Aqipe|OA penzoe
Z

(%) AUINEIOA

suondo 66] Jequieceq
Ayyiqe|OA parjduy

bE

ok
96-r1 aunBi4

298



--- 第 308 页 ---

Volatility Revisited 299

Figures 14-9A, 9B, and 9C. Over long periods of time, the marketplace is reacting to
many events. This is easier than reacting to a limited number of events, which is what
the marketplace is faced with over a short period of time. The marketplace knows that
the laws of probability are more likely to balance out over many occurrences than over
only a few occurrences.

Note also that there is no guarantee that the marketplace will have the correct
implied volatility. The implied volatility is a guess, and guesses carry with them the
possibility of error, sometimes very large error. In Figure 14-9B the implied volatility
turned out to be much too high over almost all of the option’s life. Had a trader sold
premium at any time, he would have shown a profit. At its most extreme, during
October 1992, there was almost a four-percentage-point difference between the implied
volatility of the March 1993 options and the future volatility of the March 1993 futures
contract. In Figure 1 4-9C the implied volatility was too high during the early part of the
option’s life, but too low during the latter part. During the few weeks prior to expiration,
the implied volatility was too low by as much as three percentage points. Finally, in
Figure 14-9A the implied volatility was relatively accurate over the early part of the
option’s life, but too high during the latter part.

It should be clear by now that dealing with volatility is a difficult task. To facilitate
the decision-making process we have attempted to make some generalizations about
volatility characteristics. Even then, if one decides to become involved in a market it
may not be at all clear what the right strategy is. Moreover, we have looked at a limited
number of examples, making the generalizations even less reliable. Every market has its
own characteristics, and knowing the volatility characteristics of a particular market,
whether interest rates, foreign currencies, stocks, or a physical commodity, is at least as
important as knowing the technical characteristics of volatility. And this knowledge can
only come from careful study of a market combined with actual trading experience.


--- 第 309 页 ---

Volatility Revisited 299

Figures 14-9A, 9B, and 9C. Over long periods of time, the marketplace is reacting to
many events. This is easier than reacting to a limited number of events, which is what
the marketplace is faced with over a short period of time. The marketplace knows that
the laws of probability are more likely to balance out over many occurrences than over
only a few occurrences.

Note also that there is no guarantee that the marketplace will have the correct
implied volatility. The implied volatility is a guess, and guesses carry with them the
possibility of error, sometimes very large error. In Figure 14-9B the implied volatility
turned out to be much too high over almost all of the option’s life. Had a trader sold
premium at any time, he would have shown a profit. At its most extreme, during
October 1992, there was almost a four-percentage-point difference between the implied
volatility of the March 1993 options and the future volatility of the March 1993 futures
contract. In Figure 14-9C the implied volatility was too high during the early part of the
option’s life, but too low during the latter part. During the few weeks prior to expiration,
the implied volatility was too low by as much as three percentage points. Finally, in
Figure 14-9A the implied volatility was relatively accurate over the early part of the
option’s life, but too high during the latter part.

It should be clear by now that dealing with volatility is a difficult task. To facilitate
the decision-making process we have attempted to make some generalizations about
volatility characteristics. Even then, if one decides to become involved in a market it
may not be at all clear what the right strategy is. Moreover, we have looked at a limited
number of examples, making the generalizations even less reliable. Every market has its
own characteristics, and knowing the volatility characteristics of a particular market,
whether interest rates, foreign currencies, stocks, or a physical commodity, is at least as
important as knowing the technical characteristics of volatility. And this knowledge can
only come from careful study of a market combined with actual trading experience.


--- 第 310 页 ---

a 15 &

Stock Index Futures
and Options

Since their introduction on U.S. exchanges in the early 1980s, stock index futures and
options have experienced phenomenal growth, with increasing participation by all
segments of the trading community. Both retail and institutional investors use these
instruments to invest in the market as a whole, thereby eliminating the laborious job of
trying to pick individual stocks. Portfolio managers can use index instruments to create
a wide variety of risk/reward scenarios for large, diversified stock portfolios. Finally,
professional arbitrageurs find that in spite of the highly liquid and usually efficient index
markets, pricing disparities occur often enough to warrant close monitoring of these
markets. When a disparity does exist, a trader can execute an arbitrage by hedging the
mispriced index against either other stock indices or against a basket of stocks. Such
arbitrage strategies are commonly referred to as index arbitrage.

For all of the foregoing reasons, no book on options would be complete without at
least some discussion of index options. However, index futures and options are so
closely related, and so many strategies involve both instruments, that it is almost
impossible to discuss one without discussing the other. We will therefore include both
instruments in our discussion.

WHAT IS AN INDEX?

An index is a number which represents the composite value of a group of items. In the
case of stock indices, the value of the index is determined by the value of a group of
specified stocks, with the value of the stocks usually being determined by their prices
in the marketplace. As the stocks which make up the index rise in price, the value of
the index also rises, reflecting the increased value of the stocks; as the stocks fall in price,
the value of the index also falls, reflecting the declining value of the stocks. If some
Stocks in the index rise while others fall, the offsetting changes in stock prices may result
in the index itself remaining unchanged, even though it’s possible that every stock in
the index changed price. The value of the index always reflects the total value of the
Stocks which make up the index.

301


--- 第 311 页 ---

302 Chapter 15

CALCULATING AN INDEX

There ate several different methods of calculating stock index values, but the most
common methods entail weighting the stocks either by price or by capitalization. To see
how these methods work, consider an index composed of the following four stocks:

Total Shares Total
Stock Price Outstanding Capitalization
1 125 10,000 1,250,000
2 80 5,000 400,000
3 52 25,000 1,300,000
4 17 40,000 680,000

Ifan index is price weighted, each stock’s value in the index is directly proportional
to its price. Using this method, the total value of the index is simply the sum of the prices
of all the stocks in the index:

125 + 804524 17 =274
The price weighting of each stock is therefore:

stock t: 125/274 = 45.6%
stock 2: 80/274 = 29.2%
stock 3: 52/274 = 19.0%
stock 4; 17/274= 6.2%

100.0%

Since the importance of each stock is directly proportional to its price, when
measured in percent terms movement in higher priced stocks will have a greater impact
on the value of the index than equal movement in lower priced stocks. If a trader were
monitoring a price weighted index for possible changes, he would do well to look for
movement in the higher priced stocks in the index.

If an index is capitalization weighted, the index value is the total value of all the
outstanding stock of the firms in the index. The total value, or capitalization, of a firm
is the price of a share multiplied by the number of shares issued by the firm. The total
Capitalization of the four stocks making up our index is:

(125 x 10,000) + (80 x 5,000) + (52 x 25,000) + (17 x 40,000) =
1,250,000 + 400,000 + 1,300,000 + 680,000 = 3,630,000

The capitalization weighting of each stock is therefore:

stock 1: 1,250,000/3,630,000 = 34.5%
stock 2: 400,000/3,630,000 = 11.0%
stock 3: 1,300,000/3,630,000 = 35.8%
stock 4: 680,000/3,630,000 = 18.7%

100.0%


--- 第 312 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 303

If an index is capitalization weighted, in percent terms the stocks which will have
the greatest effect on the index are those with the greatest market value. These are often
stocks which are very widely held, even though they may not be the highest priced
stocks.

For convenience, when an index is first introduced it is common to set the index
value equal to some round number, most often 100. In order to achieve this number,
the actual value of the index must be either multiplied or divided by some number. For
example, when we calculated the price weighted value of our four-stock index, the
value was 274. To transform the index value to 100, we solve:

274/x = 100
x=2.74

This number, 2.74, is referred to as the index divisor, and is used in all subsequent
index calculations. Whenever a new value of the index is calculated, that value will
always be divided by 2.74 to yield the published index value. If we wanted to set the
value of our capitalization weighted index to 100, we solve:

3,630,000/x = 100
X = 36,300

In this case, the index divisor is 36,300.

An index divisor is not constant, but can change as the capitalization of the index
changes. If stocks in the index split or declare special stock dividends, or if stocks are
replaced by other stocks due to buyouts, liquidations, or bankruptcies, the index value
might go up or down, even though the market prices of the stocks making up the index
Temain unchanged. To offset this effect, when any capitalization change occurs in the
stocks making up the index, the divisor is changed to reflect the relative value of index,
and to ensure that the index value represents a true picture of price changes in the
marketplace.

Regardless of the method used to calculate an index, prices for each of the
component stocks must be determined. Ifa stock is traded on only one exchange, there
is never any doubt as to the stock’s price. It is simply the last trade price. But what if a
stock is traded on more than one exchange? If the last trade for a stock on one exchange
is $52, while the last trade on a different exchange is $521/2, what price should be used
in calculating the index? The answer is usually specified in the index prospectus, and is
Most commonly the primary marketplace for that stock. In the United States the primary
marketplace for many stocks is the New York Stock Exchange, although this is not
always the case. Some stocks may be primarily traded on the American, Chicago,
Pacific, or Philadelphia Stock Exchanges, or in the over-the-counter market. A trader
who follows a stock index should always know the source of the stock prices used to
calculate that index.


--- 第 313 页 ---

304 Chapter 15

REPLICATING AN INDEX

Suppose a trader wanted to create a holding of stocks that exactly replicated the value
of the index. What would he have to do?

If each point in our four-stock price weighted index is worth exactly $1, then the
total value of the index is $274. A trader could simply purchase one share of each stock
in the index to exactly replicate the index. Very often, however, for trading purposes
the value of each point is assigned a value other than $1. If, for example, each point in
the index is assigned a value of $100, the total dollar value of the index is:

274 x $100 = $27,400

Now in order to exactly replicate the index, a trader would have to purchase 100 shares
of each stock. The value of his holding would then be:

(125 + 80 + 52 + 17) x 100 = $27,400

Not only must a trader consider the value of each point in an index, he must also
consider the effect the divisor will have on the index. Suppose that instead of 274, the
index in our example has been set to 100 by using a divisor of 2.74. If the point value
of the index is still $100, then the total value of the index is:

100.00 (index value) x $100 (point value) = $10,000

Now if we purchase 100 shares of each stock, the dollar value of our stock holding
($27,400) greatly exceeds the dollar value of the index ($10,000). Clearly, our stock
holding does not replicate the index. Notice, however, that the index value of $10,000
is simply our stock value of $27,400 divided by the divisor of 2.74. In other words, if
we divide each purchase of 100 shares of stock by 2.74, we will have a stock holding
equal to the value of the index. To achieve this, we need to purchase 100/2.74, or
approximately 361% shares of each stock.! If we do, the value of our stock holding will
replicate the value of the index since:

(125 + 80 + 52 + 17) x 36.5 = $10,000

The procedure is slightly more complex if we are attempting to replicate a
capitalization weighted index. Consider our four-stock capitalization weighted example
with a divisor of 36,300. Suppose each point in the index has a value of $500, so that
the dollar value of the index is:

100.00 {index value) x $500 {point value) = $50,000

How can we create a capitalization weighted stock holding with a value of $50,000?
In our price weighted example, we purchased shares of stock equal to the point

value divided by the divisor. We can take the same approach with a capitalization

weighted index, with one important change: we must multiply the resulting number by

1, Obviously, one cannot trade fractional shares of stock. In the real world, a trader attempting to replicate
the sample index would have to buy either 36 or 37 shares of each stock.


--- 第 314 页 ---

Stock index Futures and Options 305

the total number of outstanding shares of the stock. The proper number of shares of
each stock required to replicate our capitalization index is:

Outstanding Point Required
Shares Value Divisor Shares
stock 1: 10,000 x 500 + 36300 = 137.7
stock 2: 5,000 x 500 + 36300 = 68.9
stock 3: 25,000 x 500 + 36300 = 344.4
stock 4: 40,000 x 500 + 36300 = 551.0

We can see that this replicates the $50,000 value of the index since:
(137.7 x 125) + (68.9 x 80) + (344.4 x 52) + (551.0 x 17) = 50,000
Summarizing, the number of shares of each stock required to replicate an index

for a price weighted index: point value / index divisor
for a capitalization weighted index: outstanding shares x point value / index divisor

STOCK INDEX FUTURES

In theory one can create a futures contract on a stock index in exactly the same way
that futures contracts have been created on traditional commodities. At expiration, the
holder of a long stock index futures position would be required to take delivery of all
the stocks, in their correct proportions, which make up the index. The holder of a short
position would be required to make delivery of the stocks.

In fact, very few stock index futures contracts are settled through the physical
delivery of the stocks making up the index. Such a process, requiring the delivery of the
correct number of shares of many different stocks, would be unmanageable for most
Clearing organizations. To be perfectly fair, such a settlement procedure might require
the delivery of fractional shares of stock, which is impossible.

For all these reasons, exchanges have chosen to settle stock index futures at
expiration in cash. Since futures contracts are settled daily in cash, the final cash transfer
between the buyer and seller of a stock index futures contract is equal to the difference
between the expiration value of the index and the previous day’s settlement price. For
example, suppose an index is at 462.50 at the moment of expiration and the previous
day’s settlement price for the futures contract was 461.00. If each point in the index is
worth $100, the holder of a long position will be credited with a final payment of $150,
Since (462.50 — 461.00) x $100 = $150. The holder of a short position will be debited
by the same amount.

What should be the fair value of a stock index futures Contract?

Recall from Chapter { that an important difference between a futures contract and
Stock is the settlement procedure. Whereas the purchase of stock requires the buyer to
actually pay cash, the purchase of a futures contract requires only an initial margin
deposit. The cash paid for the stock will result in an interest cost, while the margin
deposit results in no such interest loss. Moreover, any profits or losses resulting from


--- 第 315 页 ---

306 Chapter 15

Stock trading are only paper profits or losses until the stock position is liquidated. In
futures markets, however, profits and losses accrue whenever the price of the futures
contract fluctuates, regardless of whether the position is closed out. These profits or
losses are typically calculated daily from the settlement price of the futures contract,
Such profits and losses result in variation, the amount of cash which is credited to or
debited from a trader’s account based on the daily price fluctuation. Variation and
margin requirements are separate and distinct. Margin in theory entails no carrying
costs, while credits or debits resulting from daily variation do indeed earn (in the case
of a credit) or lose (in the case of a debit) interest.

Clearly, the purchase of a futures contract offers one important advantage over the
purchase of the component stocks: no cash outlay is required to purchase a futures
contract. Consequently, there is an interest rate savings equal to the cost of borrowing
sufficient cash to purchase all the stocks in the index.

The amount of interest saved by purchasing a stock index futures contract rather
than the actual stocks in the index can be calculated by multiplying the current index
value by the risk-free interest rate, and then multiplying this number by the amount of
time remaining to expiration of the futures contract. By adding the resulting number to
the index value, we have the fair value of the futures contract based on carrying costs.

For example, suppose there are three months remaining to expiration with our
four-stock index at 274.00. If the risk-free interest rate over this period is 8%, what are
the carrying costs on the index?

8% x 3/12 x 274.00 = 2% x 274.00 = 5.48?

If carrying costs are the only consideration, the fair value for the futures contract will
be the 274.00 value of the index plus the 5.48-point carrying cost to expiration, or
279.48,

What other advantages or disadvantages are associated with holding a futures
contract?

If we buy a futures contract, we may have a very good substitute for the stocks in
the index, but we don’t actually own the stocks. Since ownership of a stock is necessary
for the receipt of a stock dividend, if we buy a futures contract we will have to give up
any dividends which the stocks in the index might pay. If the stocks in the index are
non-dividend paying, or will not pay any dividends prior to expiration of the futures
contract, no further calculations are necessary. The fair value will simply be the current
index value plus carrying costs to expiration. More often, however, some, and perhaps
ail of the stocks in the index will pay dividends prior to futures expiration. In this case
we must deduct the amount of dividends lost by holding a futures position rather than
the actual stocks.

Suppose that the stocks in our four-stock index are expected to pay the following
dividends prior to expiration of the futures contract:

2. — For simplicity we assume simple interest payments. We can be slightly more accurate by assuming
compound Interest (see Appendix B).


--- 第 316 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 307

Stock Price Expected Dividend
1 125 $1.80
2 80 0
3 52 $.90
4 17 $.35

If we buy one share of each of the four stocks which make up the index, we will
receive by futures expiration a total dividend payout of:

$1.80 + $.90 + $.35 = $3.05

Jf we buy the futures contract instead of the stocks we will have to forego this 3.05.
Therefore, we will want to pay 3.05 less for the futures contract. Taking into considera-
tion carrying costs, we showed that with the index at 274.00, the fair value of the
futures contract was 279.48. Deducting the dividends, the fair value of the futures
contract is:

274.00 (index value) + 5.48 (carrying costs) ~ 3.05 (expected dividends) = 276.43

If we own the stocks in the index we not only receive the dividends paid by the
stocks, we also have use of the dividend funds. If we own stock 1, we will receive a
dividend of $1.80 on the ex-dividend date and, in theory, we can also earn interest on
this amount to expiration of the futures contract. If the dividend will be paid two months
prior to expiration and interest rates are 8%, the interest earnings are:

1.80 x 2/12 x 8% = .02

To calculate an exact futures price, in addition to deducting the dividends themselves,
we must also deduct the interest earnings from each dividend payment. This could
become a rather complicated exercise, but in practice the interest earnings on dividends
are so small in relation to the actual index that most traders simply deduct the dividend
Payments themselves from the index value, and ignore the accompanying interest
earnings.

If the index is price weighted, replication of the index requires an equal number of
shares of each stock. So the total dividend payout is simply the sum of all the dividends.
If the index is capitalization weighted, replication of the index requires a different
number of shares for each stock. In that case, the total dividend payout will be the
dividend payout for each stock multiplied by the number of shares required for
replication.

Given the apparently complex dividend calculations, as well as the interest consid-
erations on the index and dividends, determining the exact fair value of a futures
contract might seem a daunting task. In practice, however, active trading firms have
computers which can quickly, and continuously, calculate the fair value for futures
contracts on most commonly traded stock indices,

Even when it is not possible to calculate the exact fair value, many traders find it
almost as effective to estimate the fair value by adding the carrying cost to the index and
subtracting the average dividend payout. For example, suppose there are nine weeks


--- 第 317 页 ---

308 Chapter 15

(63 days) to expiration on a stock index futures contract with the underlying index
currently at 425.00. If interest rates are 8% annually, and the average annual dividend
payout on the stocks making up the index is 6%, we have:

(8% — 6%) x 63/365 x 425.00 = 1.47

Therefore, the approximate fair value of the futures contract is 425.00 + 1.47 = 426.47,
The reader should be aware that this is only an estimate. If it turns out that a large
number of stocks do not pay their regular dividends during this nine-week period, or if
the dividend payout is unusually large, this estimate could prove to be far from accurate.

The daily dividend payout for the S&P 500 index for one quarterly cycle, from
March 1993 to June 1993 expiration, is shown in Figure 15-1, Note the large amounts
which were paid at the beginning of May, compared to the relatively small amounts
paid during April. The cumulative effect of this dividend payout, in terms of the total of
dividends expected to June expiration, is shown in Figure 15-2. The line drops only
slightly during April, but declines sharply during the first two weeks in May. A trader
who intended to initiate some type of arbitrage strategy either just prior to, or just after,
a large dividend payout, would need more than a rough estimate of the fair value of an
S&P 500 futures contract. If he were not aware of the exact dividend payout, a strategy
which he expected to be profitable might turn out to be just the opposite.

It is also possible to reverse the calculations and ask, given an observed futures
price, where would the index have to be for the futures to be fairly valued? For example,

Figure 15-1: S&P 500 Index Dividend Payout
(March 1993 to June 1993 Expiration)

0.25

0.20

015

0.10

Daily Dividends in Index Points

0.00
5 30 5 10 15

25 30 5 10.15 20 25 30 5 10 16 20
April May dune

March


--- 第 318 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 309

Figure 15-2: S&P 500 Dividends to Expiration
(March 1993 to June 1993 Expiration)

350
3 004-—~ > ne
250
2
&
fe}
a.
$ 2007-—-
ke]
£
£
S 1.50
Cc
o
Ko]
Fs
1.004
0.50 \
0.00-
25 30 5 10 15 20 25 30 5 10 15 20 25 30 5 10 15
March April May June

if the futures price is 432.70, and we assume that it is trading at fair value, what should
the index price be if there are 6 weeks (42 days) to expiration, interest rates are 6%, and
the expected dividend payout is 2.23? First we can add the dividend payout of 2.23 to
the futures price of 432.70, giving a value of 434.93. Then we can deduct the carrying
costs on this amount over the next six-weeks:

434.93 x 42/365 x 6% = 3.00
The implied index value is therefore 434.93 — 3.00 = 431.93.

INDEX ARBITRAGE

In theory, the price of a futures contract should always reflect the fair value of holding
the futures contract rather than holding the stocks making up the index. But markets
are not always one hundred percent efficient. If the futures price doesn’t reflect the fair
value, a trader can execute a profitable arbitrage by purchasing the undervalued asset,
either the basket of stocks or the futures contract, and selling the overvalued asset. If a
trader believes that the fair value of a stock index futures contract is 386.75, and finds
that the futures contract is trading at 387.40, he will attempt to buy all the stocks in
their correct proportion and simultaneously sell the futures contract. If the trader
succeeds, and if the point value of the futures contract is $500, for each futures contract
he executes he will show a theoretical profit of:

(387.40 - 386.75) x $500 = .65 x $500 = $325


--- 第 319 页 ---

310 Chapter 15

Of course, this profit will only be fully realized at expiration, when the futures contract
is automatically settled at the index value. At the same time, the trader will also have
to liquidate his stock holdings to ensure that at the moment of expiration both his
futures position and stock position zero out. This can be done by placing a market on
close order, guaranteeing that the last trade price for each stock which determines the
final index value will be the liquidation price for the trader’s stock holdings.

What would happen if the fair value for the stock index futures contract were
386.75, but the futures contract were actually trading at 385.95? Now the trader would
take just the opposite position, buying the undervalued futures contract and selling the
basket of stocks. The theoretical profit would be:

(386.75 - 385.95} x $500 = .80 x $500 = $400

Unfortunately, some practical problems might affect the workability of this strategy. If
the trader wants to sell stock which he doesn’t own, he will have to borrow it. If no
stock is available, or if the market in which he is dealing does not freely permit the short
sale of stock, he may notbe able to execute the arbitrage, no matter how mispriced the
futures contract. Finally, a trader might not earn full interest on the short sale of stock.
If the actual interest earned is less than the interest rate used to calculate the fair value
of the futures contract, the fair value of the futures contract, for trading purposes, may
be less than the presumed fair value of 386.75.

This type of trading strategy, where one buys or sells a mispriced stock index futures
contract and takes an opposing position in the underlying stocks, is one type of index
arbitrage. Since computers can often be programmed to calculate the fair value of a
futures contract, and to exectite the arbitrage when the futures contract is mispriced,
such a strategy is also commonly referred to as program trading. A buy program consists
of buying the stocks and selling the futures contract, and a sell program consists of selling
the stocks and buying the futures contract.

How great a mispricing of a futures contract relative to the price of the underlying
stocks fustifies futures arbitrage? If markets are totally frictionless, a trader would
attempt to execute an arbitrage if there were any mispricing, no matter how small.
Unfortunately, markets are not totally frictionless. An arbitrage which in theory is
profitable because of a mispriced futures contract may be unprofitable when transaction
costs are factored in. Ifa trader believes that it will cost approximately 1% index point
to execute all the trades required for an arbitrage, he will not attempt to enter into a
program trade unless the futures contract is at least 50 too expensive or too cheap. If
he also considers the problems associated with the short sale of stock, he may decide
that the futures contract must be .75 too cheap before he will initiate a sell program.
With the fair value of the futures contract at 386.75, the trader will initiate a program
trade only if the price of the futures contract is outside the range

386.75 — .75 and 386.75 + .50

or less than 386.00 and more than 387.25.
Even if the quoted index price is 386.75, and the futures contract is higher than
387.25 or lower than 386.00, the trader cannot be certain that a profit opportunity


--- 第 320 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 311

exists. In order to execute an arbitrage, it is necessary to trade all the stocks at a price
consistent with the index value of 386.75. But there is a bid price and an offer price for
each individual stock, and it is likely that the last trade price for some of the stocks in
the index took place at the bid price, some at the ask price, and some at prices in
petween. If a trader wants to immediately execute a buy program, he will have to
purchase every stock in the index at the ask price, and this may be at a price well above
the quoted index value.

Moreover, the quoted index price can sometimes present a distorted picture of
actual market conditions. The index itself may be quoted at 386.75, but does that
represent the price at which all the stocks in the index are trading? Perhaps trading in
some of the stocks has been halted due to pending news. Or perhaps the last sale for
one or more of the stocks took place at a price outside the current market for the stock.
The last sale in a stock may have been at 381/4, but if the market in the stock is falling
very quickly, the offered price for the stock may be 3794. The index value is based on
the last sale price of 3814, but the actual price is at least as low as 3734, and possibly
even lower. Ifa trader hopes to profit from a mispriced futures contract he must know
the true market for all the stocks which underlie that contract.

Assuming the trader can execute all purchases and sales at theoretically profitable
prices, is there anything which could go wrong with a program trade consisting of stocks
against stock index futures? Suppose a trader buys an underpriced futures contract and
simultaneously sells the underlying stocks. If the index starts to fall, and the futures
contract follows, the trader will show a profit on his stock trades and a loss on his futures
trade, and presumably these two components will offset each other. Unfortunately, the
stock trades, being subject to stock-type settlement, only result in a paper profit, while
the futures trade, being subject to futures-type settlement, results in a cash loss. If the
index drops far enough, and the trader must borrow cash to meet the variation
requirements for the futures contract, the interest cost may be so great that the arbitrage
which initially appeared profitable actually turns into a loss. This is similar to the
settlement risk for a conversion or reversal in the futures option market described in
Chapter 11.

From this, we can see that a program trade always wants the market to move in
the direction of the futures contract so that cash will flow into the trader’s account. This
will increase the trader’s potential profit, since he will be able to earn interest on this
cash over the life of the futures contract. In this respect, we can apply the concept of
the delta to futures contracts in much the same way we do to an option contract. The
delta is the rate at which a contract will change its theoretical value with respect to
movement in the underlying contract. For example, assume that a stock index is quoted
at 300.00. If there are three months to expiration, with interest rates at 8%, and an
expected dividend payout of 4.50, the fair value of a futures contract is approximately:

300.00 + (300.00 x 3/12 x .08) — 4.50 = 301.50

Suppose the index immediately rises 10% to 330.00. The new fair value of the futures
Contract is:


--- 第 321 页 ---

S312 Chapter 15

330.00 + (330.00 x 3/12 x .08) - 4.50 = 332.10

The index rose 30.00 while the futures contract rose 30.60. The delta of the futures
contract is therefore 102, since 30.60/30.00 = 1.02. The futures contract is changing
its value at 102% the rate of the underlying index.

If we assume that the dividend payout remains constant, the delta of a futures
contract is simply a function of interest rates. The extra two deltas associated with the
futures contract results from an interest rate of 8% and a time to expiration of three
months, since 3/12 x .08 = .02. As the amount of time to expiration changes, or as
interest rates change, the delta of the futures contract will also change.

We can now express in delta terms the amount by which a program trade is
unbalanced. If a trader buys 50 futures contracts, each with a delta of 102, and sells an
appropriate amount of the underlying stocks, his delta total position is

(50 x 102} - (50 x 100) = +100

He is long as if he had purchased stock outright corresponding to one index contract. If
he wants to be exactly delta neutral, he must sell a basket of stocks corresponding to
one index contract.

A change in interest rates will not only affect the delta of the futures contract, but
can also affect the profitability of a program trade. If a trader institutes a buy program
(buy the stocks, sell the futures), he is effectively borrowing cash in order to purchase
the stocks. If the cost of funds is tied to a floating interest rate, any increase in rates will
hurt his position and any decrease will help. If he institutes a sell program (sell the
stocks, buy the futures) he is effectively lending cash. Now any increase in rates will
help his position and any decrease will hurt. If the change in interest rates is sufficiently
large, an initially profitable program trade might become unprofitable. This can be
especially true if the program trade consists of very long-term futures contracts. In such
a case, the interest considerations are magnified because of the increased costs of
borrowing or lending over extended periods. In the same way, because of reduced
interest considerations, changes in interest rates are unlikely to affect program trades
consisting of short-term futures.

We have thus far assumed that the dividend payout of all the stocks in an index
remains constant, but this is not necessarily true. Companies can have good years and
bad years, and their dividend policies can change accordingly. In a buy program (buy
the stocks, sell the futures), any increase in dividends will help the position, and any
decrease will hurt. In a sell program (sell the stocks, buy the futures), the effect is just
the opposite. In a broadly based index consisting of hundreds of stocks it is unlikely that
a change in the dividend policy of any one company, or even several companies, will
have a significant impact on the profitability of a program trade. But in a narrowly based
index consisting of only a few stocks, a change in the expected dividend payout of even
one firm can alter the potential profitability of the trade. In sucha case, the trader must
carefully consider beforehand the possibility of a dividend change in the companies
making up the index.


--- 第 322 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 313

INDEX OPTIONS

There are really two types of stock index options, those where the underlying is a stock
index futures contract, and those where the underlying is the index itself. Although they
are alike in many respects, they also have unique characteristics which set them apart
from each other. For this reason, we will look at each market separately.

Options on Stock Index Futures

Since an option on a stock index futures contract is often evaluated in the same way as
a traditional futures option, a trader in such a market has all the usual problems which
go with futures option evaluation. He must pick a suitable pricing model, determine the
correct inputs into the model, choose appropriate strategies, and consider the risks that
go with these strategies. Since exercise or assignment of a futures option contract will
result in the trader taking a long or short position in the stock index futures contract,
the trader might logically use the current futures price as the underlying price input into
his theoretical pricing model. But a futures option trader is often faced with a new
problem. Should he also use the current price of the futures contract as his price input
if the futures contract is clearly mispriced and trading at other than fair value?

For example, if a stock index futures contract is trading at 424.00 but an option
trader believes that the fair value is 425.00, which value should the trader feed into his
theoretical pricing model? If the trader really believes that the futures contract ought to
be trading at 425.00, and also believes that all the assumptions upon which the
theoretical pricing model is based are valid, then he might very well choose to use
425.00 as the underlying price in his model. He can then take option positions, whether
outright or spread positions, by purchasing options which he believes are underpriced
and selling those which he believes are overpriced.

Notice, however, that with the futures contract trading at 424.00, he cannot use
425.00 as his price input and still use the futures contract to hedge his option position.
If he were to do so, whatever positive theoretical edge he achieved because of his option
trades would automatically be offset by the negative theoretical edge resulting from his
futures trades. This becomes obvious when we recall the basic synthetic relationship for
futures options from Chapter 11:

call price — put price = futures price — exercise price

If the trader believes the underlying futures contract ought to be trading at 425.00, then
he also believes that the 425 call and the 425 put ought to be trading at an identical
price. The difference between the presumed futures price and the exercise price is zero,
So the difference between the call price and put price ought to also be zero. But with
the underlying futures market actually trading at 424.00, the call price will be approxi-
mately 1.00 less than the put price. If the 425 call is trading for 8.50 and the 425 put
is trading for 9.50, the call will appear too cheap to the trader and the put will appear
too expensive. Unfortunately, if the trader buys the call for 8.50 and sells the put for
9.50, he has no way to lock in his presumed profit of 1.00. If he attempts to complete
the reverse conversion (buy the call, sell the put, sell the underlying), he will have to


--- 第 323 页 ---

314 Chapter 15

do so by selling the futures contract at 424.00. What he makes on the options he will
give back on the futures contract.

If a trader simply wants to execute volatility or directional spreads based on a
presumed underlying price of 425.00, then it might very well make sense to use that
price as the input into the theoretical pricing model. But professional option traders rely
heavily on arbitrage relationships for many of their trading strategies. If a price other
than the actual underlying price is used, these arbitrage relationships will no longer be
valid. Because the choice of underlying price may vary from trader to trader, many
on-line option evaluation services give traders the choice of using either the actual
futures price or the theoretical futures price as the basis for theoretical evaluation.

Although the ultimate decision about the underlying price is the trader’s, in a stock
index futures option market a trader should be very careful about using an underlying
futures price different from the quoted price. As we have already seen, the theoretical
value of a stock index futures contract depends on information which may not be readily
available to the trader. If he is wrong about the price at which the index is actually
trading because the individual stock prices do not reflect the true market, his theoretical
evaluation of the futures contract will be incorrect. Most traders have learned through
experience that the apparent mispricing of a stock index futures contract is often
illusory, or at least smaller than it appears.

Options on a Cash Index

The exercise or assignment of a stock option requires the buyer or seller to take delivery
or make delivery of the underlying stock. In theory there is no reason why the exercise
or assignment of a stock index option could not be treated the same way. If a trader
were to exercise such an option, he would take delivery or make delivery of all the
stocks in the index, in their correct proportion, at a price equivalent to the value of the
index. The trader who was assigned would take an opposing position at the same price.

While this sounds reasonable, in practice it presents the same problems that would
arise if we were to settle a stock index futures contract through the physical delivery of
all the stocks. The delivery of many different stocks, in their appropriate amounts (which
might include fractional shares), would overwhelm the clearing organization. As with
futures, the popular solution is to settle the contract in cash rather than through physical
delivery. If a trader holds a 440 call and exercises it with the index at 450, he is credited
with a cash amount equivalent to 10 index points. If each index point has a value of
$100, his account is credited with $1,000. The account of the trader who is assigned
on the same call is debited $1,000. In the same way, ifa trader exercises a 475 put with
the index at 450, his account will be credited with $2,500. The account of the trader
who is assigned will be debited $2,500.

In theory, if the index option is American, carrying with it the right of early
exercise, the cash settlement should be based on the index value at the time the trader
exercises his option. But this is impractical since exercise is not an instantaneous
transaction. An exercise notice must be filled out by the trader, submitted to the clearing
firm, and then submitted to the clearing house. Even if one could pinpoint the precise
time at which an option was exercised, it might be difficult to ascertain the exact value


--- 第 324 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 315

of the index. For all these reasons, the exercise or assignment value for an index option
is calculated from the index value at the end of the trading day.3 Whether an exercise
notice is submitted at 10:00 AM or 3:00 PM, both traders will be credited with cash equal
to the difference between the exercise price and the index value at the close of trading
on that day.4

Evaluating a Cash Index Option

The most common method for evaluating cash options on a stock index is based on the
assumption that the underlying contract for a cash index option is a basket of stocks
which, taken together, have the characteristics of one individual stock. Therefore, a
trader might logically choose to evaluate options on an index using a traditional stock
option model, the Black-Scholes model for European options or the Cox-Ross-Ruben-
stein model for American options. In either case, it will be necessary to feed into the
model the usual information: time to expiration, exercise price, underlying price,
interest rates, volatility, and dividend payout. Unfortunately, the dividend payout
presents a problem which we have already touched upon in the discussion of stock
index futures. If the options are European, with no possibility of early exercise, the total
amount of dividend payout expected to expiration is sufficient for theoretical evaluation.
But if the options are American, where early exercise is a possibility, we need to know
the exact date of the dividend payout. There is, however, no one exact date since
dividends on different stocks are paid at different times. In order to accurately evaluate
American options, we need to create a matrix of dividend payouts with the dates and
amounts, and then feed this into our theoretical pricing model. Ifa trader wants an exact
evaluation of a stock index option, he will need software which is capable of exact
dividend calculations.

A less accurate method, but one which might be practical for many traders, is to
assume a constant dividend payout. A trader can attempt to determine the average
percent dividend paid by each stock, deduct this from the interest rate component, and
use the result as the interest rate input. For example, if the average dividend payout is
4%, and interest rates are 6%, the trader can ignore the dividend input and simply use
an interest rate of 2%. Some models allow the user to enter the interest rate and the
dividend payout (as a percent) individually, and from these inputs the model calculates
the value of an American option. In both cases, however, the value of early exercise will
be distorted since stock option calls are often exercised just prior to a dividend payout,
and puts are often exercised just after a dividend payout. When no exact dividend date
has been entered into the model, optimum early exercise cannot be calculated. The
distortion can sometimes be quite large if many stocks in the index happen to pay a large

3. Because of the order imbalances which can occur in individual stocks when a large number of stock
index arbitrages are liquidated at the same time, some exchanges have chosen to settle stock Index
options and futures on expiration day based on the opening index price. This opening price {fs
determined by the opening prices of each stock in the index on that day. Since stocks can open at
different times, the index value may not represent simultaneous stock trades.

4. There is usually a cut-off time after which an index option may not be exercised on a given day. In the
United States this is usually within an hour after the index has been fixed at the end of the trading day.


--- 第 325 页 ---

316 Chapter 15

dividend on the same date, or pay no dividend for an extended period. Figure 15-1
shows that this is often the case for the S&P 500.

A Phantom Variable

Tn some markets, stocks or their derivative products continue to trade after the closing
index price has been fixed for the day. In the United States, most stock indices are fixed
at 4:00 PM Eastern Time when trading ceases on the New York Stock Exchange.
However, many of the stocks in the index continue to trade on regional stock
exchanges, and futures and options on the indices may also continue to trade for some
period after the close. The fact that the underlying index may be fixed while options
and futures on the index continue to trade results in an anomaly concerning early
exercise.

Suppose a trader owns a stock which settles at a price of $50 when trading ceases
at 4:00 PM on the primary stock exchange. Suppose also that the trader has the right to
sell that stock to someone at the settlement price of $50 until 12:00 midnight the same
day. If the trader’s intention is to hold onto the stock, their is no reason for him to
exercise this right. But suppose some negative news on the stock comes out at 4:30 PM,
and he finds that the stock is now trading on other exchanges at $48. What will he do?
If he decided that he wanted to sell the stock because of the bad news, the trader would
certainly exercise his right to sell at $50 rather than selling it at $48 on some other
exchange. Even if he wanted to retain ownership of the stock, he would immediately
realize that he could show an extra $2 profit by exercising his right to sell at $50, and
buying the stock back at $48. Indeed, he would be foolish not to do so since if he did
not, he would be throwing away $2.

A similar situation occurs in stock index options where early exercise is a possibil-
ity, and where alternative instruments are available on the index after the index has
been fixed at the close of the trading day. To see what can happen, consider an option
market on a very simple, non-dividend paying index which has been fixed at 400.00
when the stock exchange ceases trading at 4:00 PM. If there are 30 days remaining to
expiration, with implied volatility at 14%, interest rates at 6%, and no dividend
expected, option prices and implied deltas might be the following:

Index = 400.00
Time to June expiration = 30 days —_— Implied volatility = 14%
Interest rates = 6% Dividend = 0

Exercise Call Call Put Put
Price Price Delta Price Delta
380 22.44 92 59 -8
390 13.98 78 2.12 -23
400 7.42 56 5.62 —46
410 3.24 32 11.71 -72

420 1.14 14 20.12 -94


--- 第 326 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 317

Suppose that at 4:05 pM some very negative economic news comes out. Stocks start
to fall on other exchanges which are still open, and traders in the index futures and
option markets, which continue to trade after 4:00 PM, react as if the index will open
10 points lower the next morning. If the option market does open the next day at
390.00, option prices and deltas might then look like the following:

Index = 390.00
Time to June expiration = 29 days —_ Implied volatility = 14%
Interest rates=6% Dividend =0

Exercise Call Call Put Put
Price Price Delta Price Delta
380 13.70 79 1.95 -22
390 7.10 55 5.40 -46
400 2.98 31 11.55 ~-73
410 98 13 20.08 -95
420 22 4 30.00 -100

Suppose a trader originally owned ten 380 calls. What should he do when the
negative news hits the market? If he holds his calls, and the market does open at 390.00
the next morning, his calls will be trading at 13.70, He will show a loss of 22.44 —
13.70, or 8.74 per call. But if he exercises his calls today, he will receive 20.00 points,
the difference between the exercise price of 380 and that day’s index settlement price
of 400.00. If he exercises, his loss will only be 22.44 — 20.00, or 2.44 per option. If he
fails to exercise, he will automatically show an additional loss of 6.30.

Anytime after the index value has been fixed for the day, a trader who finds that
the next day’s presumed theoretical value is less than parity will be better off exercising
an index option early rather than holding it. In this scenario the 390 calls will also
become early exercise candidates, although the savings will not be as great as with the
380 calls. Prior to the news, the 390 calls might be trading for 13.98. But if the market
drops to 390.00 the next morning, the 390 calls will only be trading for 7.10. If the
trader owns 390 calls and doesn’t exercise, he will lose 13.98 - 7.10, or 6.88 per call.
{f he does exercise, he will lose only 13.98 — 10.00, or 3.98. He will save 2.90 per call
through early exercise.

Of course, implied volatility might increase following such a violent drop in the
market. But even if implied volatility jumps to 18%, the prices of the 380 and 390 calls
the next morning will only be 15.06 and 8.84, respectively. This is still less than parity,
So a trader holding these calls would still want to exercise them early.

Although it does seem that stock index markets are more susceptible to bad news
than good, puts might also become early exercise candidates if the market were to jump
following unusually bullish news. If, in our example, there was a perception that the
Market would open the next morning 10 points higher, at 410.00, the option prices
Might look like this:


--- 第 327 页 ---

318 Chapter 15

Index = 410.00
Time to June expiration = 29 days Implied volatility = 14%
Interest rates=6%  Dividend=0

Exercise Call Call Put Put
Price Price Delta Price Delta
380 31.92 98 12 ~2
390 22.45 92 61 -8
400 14.01 78 2.16 23
410 7.46 535 5.67 -46
420 3.28 32 11.75 -72

Now the 410 and 420 puts have become early exercise candidates. Based on the
closing index price of 400.00, their parity values are 10.00 and 20.00. But with the
index perceived to be at 410.00 their prices are only 5.67 and 11.75. Even if implied
volatility were to rise to 18%, their prices would only be 7.49 and 13.37, respectively.
This is still well below parity, so a trader would want to exercise the puts rather than
hold them.

In a market where early exercise is a possibility, options should never trade for less
than parity. If a stock index option market remains open after the index has been fixed
for the day (as it does for 15 minutes in the United States), even if traders begin to trade
the options as if the market will open the next morning at a price significantly different
than that day’s closing index price, all options must trade at a price of at least parity. If
this were not true, there would be an immediate arbitrage opportunity. If the 390 call
were really trading at 7.04 as a result of the negative news, a trader would buy as many
calls as possible and immediately submit exercise notices, in the process collecting 10
points per option. He would realize an immediate profit of 2.96 per option.

What would happen if the marketplace were wrong about where the index would
open the next morning? Suppose that traders believe the market will open the next
morning 10 points lower, but in fact the market opens unchanged, or even several
points higher. Wouldn’t a trader who exercised the 380 or 390 calls regret his actions?
Regardless of what happens the following morning, a trader will always be better off
exercising as long as he takes action to offset the effects of the exercise.

For example, suppose the trader initiated the following delta neutral ratio spread
before the negative news reached the market:

long 10 June 390 calls at 13.98 delta = 78
short 25 June 410 calls at 3.24 delta = 32

If the trader holds the position, including his 390 calls, and the market opens the next
morning at 390, he will show a loss of 12.75, since:

-10 x (13.98 — 7.10) +25 x (3.24 - .98) = -12.30

But suppose the trader decides to exercise his 390 calls. He still needs to balance his
delta position by taking in the 780 deltas which disappeared when he exercised his calls.


--- 第 328 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 319

One way to do this is to simply close out the spread by buying back the 410 calls at their
new price of .98. If he does this, he will show a profit of 16.85, since:

-10 x (13.98 - 10.00) +25 x (3.24 — .98) = +16.70

If the trader does not want to liquidate his short position in the 410 calls, he can look
for another way of taking in 780 deltas. If other stock exchanges are still open and the
trader can purchase the stocks making up the index at the new, lower prices and in the
correct proportion, he might consider buying stock equivalent to eight index contracts
(800 deltas) to make up his loss of 780 deltas. Or, if a futures contract is available on
the index, and the futures market, in reaction to the negative news, is now trading 10
points lower, he might buy eight futures contracts since each contract will have
approximately 100 index deltas.

Tt may seem odd, but in fact it doesn’t matter whether the index opens the next
morning at a higher price, lower price, or unchanged. What matters is that the
marketplace believes that the market will change, and that all contracts are priced
accordingly. In such a case, the trader must exercise those options which, given the
perceived change in the underlying price, now have a value less than parity, and replace
them with other contracts which are not limited by parity constraints.

There is clearly an additional early exercise value associated with cash index
options, a value which does not result from the usual early exercise considerations of
dividends or interest. This value arises because under some circumstances a trader can
exercise index options and replace them with other instruments at more favorable
prices. How much is this replacement value worth? The answer depends on the
probability of some significant event occurring between the time the index is fixed and
the close of trading in other instruments linked to the index: stocks, futures, and options.
Itis doubtful that anyone really knows how to quantify that probability, and traders tend
to regard the possibility of a significant event occurring as a phantom variable. No one
knows how to evaluate it, but everyone agrees that it exists.

The extra early exercise value resulting from this phantom variable is most evident
in the trading of boxes in an index option market. Suppose we are interested in buying
a 420/430 box (buy the 420 call and 430 put, sell the 420 put and 430 call). If the box
is made up of European options where early exercise is not a possibility, the value of the
box is simply the 10-point difference between exercise prices less the carrying cost on
10 points to expiration. If there are four weeks to expiration and interest rates are 6%,
the value of the box is approximately:

10.00 — (28/365 x 6% x 10.00) = 9.95

If these are American options there will be some early exercise value attached to them
because of dividend and interest considerations. The extra value will be greatest for the
420 call and 430 put, so the value of the box will be slightly greater than 9.95. Using a
binomial model, and given a normal dividend payout, we might find that a 10-point box
in the S&P 100 (OEX) market has a value of approximately 10.05. Yet such boxes in the

5. For simplicity, we ignore the likelihood that the trader who continues to hold a spread position will
make adjustments to his delta position as a result of the movement in the underlying Index.



--- 第 329 页 ---

320 Chapter 15

S&P 100 market often trade for as much as 1014 to 1034. The additional amount over
expected theoretical value is the value the marketplace places on the possibility of early
exercise after the index has been fixed at the end of the day.

If the right of early exercise can represent an additional reward to the holder of a
stock index option, then the possibility of early assignment must represent an additional
risk to the seller of such an option. Indeed, the risk to the seller of an index option may
seem even greater than the reward to the buyer. The seller is not only at the mercy of
the buyer in terms of when the option will be exercised; he may not even find out that
he has been assigned until it is too late to take protective action.

The problem for the seller is that index options are settied in cash, and cash does
not carry a delta value. When a trader is assigned in a normal stock option market, the
assignment may result in a loss to the trader in terms of dividends or interest costs, but
at least it does not upset his delta position. If the stock option is deeply enough
in-the-money to be exercised, it probably has a delta very close to 100. When the option
is exercised, the 100 deltas associated with the option disappear, but they are immedi-
ately replaced with the 100 deltas associated with the stock contract. But when a trader
is assigned on an in-the-money stock index option, not only does assignment cause a
negative cash flow, but the deltas associated with the assigned options completely
disappear. If the trader knows immediately that he has been assigned, he might be able
to do something to rebalance his delta position. Unfortunately, exercise notices are
processed overnight, so the trader will not find out that he has been assigned until the
next trading day. If he is short deeply in-the-money index options and is assigned, the
following day he may find himself with a big positive or negative delta position, perhaps
much bigger than he would like. If the market moves substantially on the opening, the
trader could find himself with severe losses before he ever has a chance to take any
defensive action.

Synthetic Relationships
Suppose a stock is trading at 100. With two months to expiration, interest rates at 6%,
and no dividend expected prior to expiration, what should be the relationship between
the 100 call and the 100 put? If we ignore the possibility of early exercise, we know
from the synthetic relationship in Chapter 11 that the call price should exceed the put
price by approximately the carrying costs on the exercise price of 100:

call price — put price = exercise price — stock price + carrying costs
Since the carrying costs on the exercise price are
100 x 6% x 2/12 = 1.00

we know that the call should be 1.00 more expensive than the put. If the put is trading
for 4.00, the call should be trading for 5.00.

Suppose that the stock is trading for 100 and the put 4.00, but the call is actually
trading for 4.25. What should a trader do? Regardless of the trader’s opinion about
volatility, it’s clear that the call is .75 too cheap with respect to the put. A trader familiar
with synthetic relationships will attempt to take advantage of this relative mispricing by


--- 第 330 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 321

executing a reverse conversion: buy the call for 4.25, sell the put for 4.00, sell the stock
for 100. The result will be a profit at expiration of .75 when the trader closes out the
position by either exercising the put or being assigned on the call.

True arbitrage relationships are unlikely to be violated in an option market where
there is a well defined and freely traded underlying contract. If such a relationship is
violated, a trader can always trade the underlying instrument against the mispriced
arbitrage relationship and essentially lock in a profit equal to the mispricing. The
cumulative effect of all traders attempting to profit from a mispriced relationship is that
the mispricing quickly disappears.

Now consider a trader who encounters a similar mispricing ina stock index option
market where the options are settled in cash. Suppose that the index is at 400 and that,
according to the synthetic relationship, the 400 call should be 3.00 greater than the 400
put. With the 400 put trading at 6.00, the trader would expect to see the 400 call
trading at 9.00. What should he do if he finds that the 400 call is actually trading at
7.50?

The trader would like to take the same action in the index that he would take if he
were dealing with options in an individual stock: buy the call for 7.50, sell the put for
6.00, and sell the index for 400.00. This ought to result in a profit of 1.50, the amount
by which the call and put are mispriced relative to each other. Is this a practical strategy
in the index option market?

Certainly the trader can buy the 400 call and sell the 400 put. But when the trader
goes to sell the index he may find that it is not as easy as he originally thought.
Depending on how broadly based the index is, the trader may have to sell several
hundred stocks in various proportions. It might be possible to do so, but it will certainly
not be as easy as selling one stock.

Even if he is able to sell all the stocks in the index in the right proportion, has he
executed a true reverse conversion? A true reverse conversion consists of being long a
call and short a put, and short the underlying instrument, where the underlying
instrument is the instrument to be delivered when an option is exercised. If the basket
of stocks were the true underlying instrument, the trader would make delivery of, or
take delivery of, the basket if the 400 call or 400 put were exercised. But this is not
what happens in an index market. If the trader exercises the call, or is assigned on the
put, there is a cash transfer. But the trader is still left holding the basket of stocks.

The fact that the index is settled in cash can make a conversion or reverse
conversion a much riskier strategy in an index option market than in an individual stock
option market, especially if the options are American. Moreover, arbitrage strategies are
typically done in large size because of their narrow profit margin. If a trader executes
such a strategy and finds himself assigned overnight, his position might become horribly
unbalanced. The next day even a small adverse move in the index could prove
disastrous.

If a trader could execute all the stocks in the index, and could be certain of holding
the position to expiration, he would still have to physically liquidate his stock position.
Since the option values at expiration are determined by the closing index value, and
since the index value is determined by the closing trades in each individual stock, the


--- 第 331 页 ---

322 Chapter 15

trader must ensure that he closes each of his individual stock positions at the closing
price on the exchange from which the index is calculated. In many cases, he can
accomplish this by placing market-on-close (MOC) orders for each individual stock. But
he must be very careful. If he fails to close out each stock position at the appropriate
Price, his arbitrage may not produce the profit originally expected.

Because it can be difficult to trade a complete and correctly proportioned basket of
stocks, and because there is the additional risk of early exercise after an index arbitrage
has been executed, mispriced synthetic relationships are not as easy to exploit in index
option markets as in other option markets. Not only do such mispricings occur more
frequently in index option markets, they can persist for long periods of time.

Finding a Substitute for the Index

Regardless of the difficulty in executing arbitrage strategies, if a synthetic relationship
appears to be sufficiently mispriced a trader will look for some way to exploit the
situation, even with the additional risks that go with such a strategy. This means either
trying to execute the basket of stocks underlying the index, or looking for an acceptable
substitute for the basket.

If the index is narrowly based, with only 20 or 30 stocks, it may not be unreason-
able to try and execute a complete basket of stocks. If the index is more broadly based,
with several hundred stocks, the difficulties of executing every stock in the right
quantity may make it impractical to execute a complete basket. In such a case, a trader
may question whether a complete basket is really necessary for his purposes. In most
indices not every stock has the same weighting. If an index is very broadly based, price
changes in the smallest companies may have very little impact on the index. It may be
possible to eliminate these companies and still have a basket which is almost identical
to the index,

In the search for an acceptable tradeoff between ease of execution and correlation
with the index, traders are always experimenting with different pseudo-baskets, a
selection of stocks in the index which can be easily bought or sold, and which will react
to changing market conditions in a way which is almost identical to the actual index.
The primary question for most traders is one of correlation. What degree of correlation
is sufficient for the trader’s purposes? 100 percent? 99%? 95%? A correlation of 99%
between a pseudo-basket and the index may sound good. But if the index is at 400.00
and a trader executes a conversion with the synthetic market mispriced by 1.00, the
99% correlation means he could be wrong by as much as 1% of 400.00, or 4.00. Under
some conditions, his presumed profit of 1.00 might turn into a loss of 3.00. Of course,
the laws of probability are still in the trader’s favor. The pseudo-basket’s deviation from
the true index could also work in the trader’s favor, occasionally giving him a profit
greater than 1.00. Arbitrages tend to be done in large size because they are supposed to
be very low-risk strategies. If the trader executes a large number of conversions or
reverse conversions using a pseudo-basket in place of the actual index, he may find that
the correlation risk has a greater impact than he expected.

Another possible substitute for the index is a futures contract on the index which
underlies the cash options. If such a contract is available, a trader can use the futures


--- 第 332 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 323

contract in place of the underlying basket in his arbitrage strategies. The futures contract
is not only easier to execute than a basket, with lower transaction costs, but there will
be a 100% correlation between the futures contract and the actual index. If the futures
contract and the index expire at the same time, the futures contract and the option
values will converge to the same price at expiration. Moreover, the trader will not have
to worry about liquidating either his option or futures position. The clearing house will
automatically settle all contracts in cash at expiration.

Providing that the futures contract and the options expire at the same time, a
futures contract on the same index which underlies the cash option market is a perfect
substitute for the basket. Indeed, if the options are European with no chance of early
exercise, an arbitrage between the futures contract and options is virtually riskless. Once
the trader has completed his arbitrage, he knows that the futures contract and index
will correlate perfectly and will converge at expiration. In the United States, traders in
the S&P 500 options market at the Chicago Board Options Exchange often treat the S&P
500 futures contract traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as the underlying
contract in their strategies. Traders take a similar approach on many European and
Asian exchanges which trade index options on cash and where a futures contract with
the same underlying index is also available.

If the futures contract offers an acceptable substitute for the index basket, the
problem then becomes one of the prices at which an arbitrage can be executed. While
it may be easy to buy and sell a futures contract, can it be done at prices which make a
conversion or reverse conversion profitable? If the synthetic market is mispriced by 1.00
in the index option market, and we can trade the futures contract at exactly its fair
value, there is no problem. But is that likely to be the case? If it were, everyone in the
marketplace would line up to buy or sell a synthetic in the option market, and take an
Opposing position in the futures market. This activity would force the markets back to
fair value, and any arbitrage opportunity would quickly disappear. Traders find that if
contracts are mispriced in one index market, they are often mispriced by an equal
amount in other index markets. If a synthetic underlying position (long call, short put)
is 1.00 too cheap in the option market, a trader usually finds that the futures contract
is also 1.00 too cheap. If this were not the case, everyone would take advantage of the
Situation by purchasing the cheaper contract, either the synthetic or futures contract,
and selling the more expensive. In this respect, markets afe typically very efficient. A
mispricing in one market usually means a similar mispricing in all related markets.

Tf it can be traded at the right price, a futures contract on an index is perhaps the
best substitute an option trader can find. If such a contract is not available, a trader might
instead consider a futures contract on a different, but similar, index. For example, the
largest index option market in the United States is the S&P 100 (OEX) market at the
Chicago Board Options Exchange. Traders in this market are always searching for an
acceptable substitute for the underlying basket of 100 stocks. A futures contract on this

6. Options on S&P 500 futures are also traded at the CME. Because there is so little early exercise premium
in futures options, and because the S&P 500 cash options traded at the CBOE are European, it turns
out that the markets for both the futures options and cash options are almost identical.


--- 第 333 页 ---

324 Chapter 15

index would be an ideal substitute but, unfortunately, one does not exist,” However,
there is a strong correlation between the S&P 100 and S&P 500 indices and, as noted
earlier, a futures contract on the latter index is actively traded at the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange.

Using an alternative index futures contract as a substitute for the actual underlying
index presents several problems. The first is correlation. Just as a pseudo-basket may not
correlate exactly, not all indices correlate exactly, even those with many of the same
stocks. Figure 15-3 shows the spread between two highly correlated indices, the S&P
500 and the S&P 100, during 1992 and 1993. Note that the spread had a range of almost
20 index points over this period. Moreover, it was not uncommon for the spread to
change by as much as five points over a period of several weeks. This highlights the
trading risk that can arise when one index is used as a substitute for another.

In addition, not all indices expire at the same time. S&P 100 options are settled
from the closing stock prices on the last trading day, while the S&P 500 futures are
settled from the opening stock prices on the same day. Because of this, holding an S&P
100 option versus an S&P 500 futures position to expiration represents a substantial and,
for most traders, unacceptable risk. If a trader uses S&P 500 futures as a hedge against
S&P 100 options, he will almost certainly close one side of the position prior to
expiration. Traders have found that using S&P 500 futures contracts as a hedge against
S&P 100 options is a short-term solution at best.

The best solution for most index option traders is to avoid using substitute index
contracts whenever possible, and to attempt to execute all strategies within the same
index market. For arbitrage traders, this means focusing on boxes and jelly rolls, and the
time spreads, vertical spreads, and butterflies from which these strategies are con-
structed. For example, a trader might buy a call time spread, and then try to sell the
companion put time spread, thereby creating a jelly roll. Or he might buy a bull vertical
call spread, and then try to buy the companion bear vertical put spread, thereby creating
a box. Or he might look for butterflies which he believes are mispriced, and try to
combine them later with other butterflies to create relatively low risk strategies which
act much like an arbitrage.

But even boxes and jelly rolls can present problems. Both carry the risk of early
exercise. And a trader who executes a jelly roll still has to decide what to do with his
near-term synthetic position as near-term expiration approaches. For example, suppose
a trader is long the March/June 410 jelly roll:

short March 410 call long June 410 call
long March 410 put short June 410 put

At March expiration the March synthetic will be settled in cash, and the trader will be
left with the June synthetic position. If he wants to hold the position and convert it into
a reverse conversion, he will have to sell the underlying basket or a suitable substitute.
When he tries to do this he will encounter the same problems we have already

7. In the early 1980s the Chicago Mercantile Exchange did trade an S&P 100 futures contract. But the
contract was delisted due to insufficient activity.


--- 第 334 页 ---

325

Stock Index Futures and Options

ye-uer

£6-90

€6-Inr
4

ee-ady
1

oo _ 1 £ Oz

Ge

O€

se

Ov

Sv

{OOl dS SNuIW 00S d¥S) Peeids OOL d¥S / 005 dS :e-S1 eunBly


--- 第 335 页 ---

326 Chapter 15

discussed. This means that jelly rolls, involving two expiration months, can be mispriced
in the same way a simple synthetic relationship can be mispriced within one expiration
month. If the March 410 synthetic is 1.00 too cheap, while the June 410 synthetic is
1.50 too cheap, the March/June 410 jelly roll will be 50 too cheap. But this is only in
theory, since to take advantage of the mispricing, a trader would have to be able to carry
the underlying index from March to June expiration. But there is usually no true
underlying available, only reasonable substitutes.

BIASES IN THE INDEX MARKET

Although there can be widespread mispricing of synthetic relationships in an index
option market, especially where early exercise is a possibility and options are subject to
cash settlement, we might assume that this mispricing is random. Sometimes synthetic
markets will be too expensive and sometimes they will be too cheap compared to their
theoretical values. In the real world, however, synthetic markets always seem to be
under pressure. That is, the synthetic market tends to trade at less than theoretical value.
If the synthetic market (the difference between a call price and its companion put price)
is worth 1.00, the actual market price usually seems to be something less than 1.00.
What causes this systematic, downward bias?

Index markets, with their great liquidity, are the most popular of all option markets.
They offer all types of traders—directional, volatility, arbitrage—a chance to make
decisions based on general market conditions rather than on the unique factors which
can affect individual stocks. True or not, most traders believe that the general market is
less subject to manipulation than individual stocks, so that index options markets offer
a more level playing field.

One especially active participant in index markets is the portfolio manager. A
portfolio manager is responsible for going into the market and generating a maximum
return on capital with a minimum amount of risk. Historically, portfolio managers have
achieved this goal in the equity markets by maintaining a portfolio of stocks which the
manager believed would outperform the general market. As the manager identified new
stocks which met this criteria he added them to the portfolio, while at the same time
selling off other stocks in the portfolio which had either met his performance goals or
ceased to perform as expected.

A manager with an equity portfolio might naturally want to protect his holding by
taking advantage of the hedging opportunities in an option market. For example, he
might want to buy puts to protect the stocks in the portfolio, or sell calls to enhance the
stocks’ performance. Until the introduction of index options he had to execute the
hedging strategy for each individual stock within that stock’s option market. If he owned
40 stocks and wanted to execute a uniform hedging strategy for the portfolio, the
manager had to go into the individual option markets for the 40 different stocks and
execute each hedging strategy separately. This was not only time consuming, but the
transaction costs tended to reduce the expected benefits of the hedge.

With the introduction of index options, a manager with a broadly based portfolio
realized that his holdings often mimicked an index on which derivative instruments


--- 第 336 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 327

were available. If the manager believed that the characteristics of his portfolio were
sufficiently similar to the index, index options now offered a way of hedging the stocks
in the portfolio without the time consuming and costly process of executing a hedging
strategy in each individual stock.

However, the effect of portfolio hedging strategies on stock index derivatives has
peen one-sided. Whereas a professional trader will take either a long or short position
in the underlying instrument, as market conditions dictate, the vast majority of equity
portfolio managers take only long positions in equities. Even if a manager believes a
stock will underperform the market, one rarely hears of a manager selling stock short
(selling stock which he doesn’t own) as part of his investment program. Therefore, a
portfolio manager is almost always trying to hedge a long position in the market. This
means that the manager is either buying protective puts, selling covered calls, or
pursuing some combination of these strategies. The result is that there is constant selling
pressure on calls and constant buying pressure on puts.

This downward bias is also evident in stock index futures markets, where a
portfolio manager can pursue a dynamic hedging strategy, such as portfolio insurance,
by selling futures contracts to protect his equity holdings against adverse market
movement. The effect is the same as in option markets—there is always downward
pressure on the markets.

If there were a sure way to profit from this downward bias in the market,
arbitrageurs would take the opposite position in the underlying index. But we have seen
that executing an exact basket is not always possible. Moreover, when the portfolio
manager protects his long equity position by selling calls, buying puts, or selling futures,
a market maker or arbitrageur ends up taking the opposite position. He is long calls,
short puts, or long futures. If he wants to hedge his position with an underlying basket
of stocks, he must sell stocks short. And selling stocks short is never as easy as buying
stocks. While not totally prohibited in the United States, as it is in many markets, traders
who want to sell short are subject to an uptick rule (see Chapter 5). And there is no
guarantee that an uptick will occur in even one stock, let alone several hundred.®
Moreover, most traders are subject to different borrowing and lending rates. Even if a
trader can sell short all the stocks in the basket, the interest earnings from the short
Stock sale may not be the same as the interest cost when stock is purchased.

Given all these factors, the stock index market is not a symmetrical one. Many
More factors seem to result in downward pressure on synthetics and futures than
upward pressure. This does not mean that such markets can never become inflated,
with calls trading for more than expected with respect to puts, or with futures contracts
trading at greater than fair value. But this is by far the exception. In stock index markets
around the world, there tends to be constant downward pressure on derivative
Products.

8. The Chicago Stock Exchange has tried to facilitate the trading of index products by introducing the
Chicago Basket (CMX), a basket of 20 major U.S. stocks which can be traded at one time, and which
is not subject to the uptick rule. Hence, a trader who wants to be short all 20 stocks can sell the basket
without worrying about finding an uptick in each individual stock.


--- 第 337 页 ---

Chapter 15

328

S6-Uer 26ine eouer Leint be-uer

o6-Inr

o6-uer seine
i

6B-uer

AWMEIOA [eoL01sSIH

xapu| AUe|OA Parjduu}

(xtA) Xepuy AnjHeloA petjduy X3O snssea AyefoA [e9140}S1H Aeq-0f X3O :-SL eunbi4

SE

(%) ANWeIOA pezijenuuy



--- 第 338 页 ---

Stock Index Futures and Options 329

Finally, there also tends to be a consistent bias in premium levels in index option
markets. This can be seen in Figure 15-4, a comparison of the 30-day historical volatility
of the OEX with the OEX implied volatility index from 1989 to 1992.9 Note that the
implied volatility is almost always greater than the historical volatility. If one believes
that the traditional theoretical pricing models are reasonably accurate, it is clear that
those who purchase index options are consistently overpaying for them.

While a professional trader would not expect to be very successful if he consistently
paid more for options than their theoretical values, such an approach is not necessarily
unreasonable for a hedger. If one thinks of options as insurance protection, there are
definite benefits that go with owning options. In particular the owner of an option has
limited risk with unlimited profit potential. Regardless of theoretical value, these are
benefits for which hedgers are very often willing to pay an extra amount. To see why,
consider a homeowner who buys insurance to protect his family. Since the insurance
company is in business to make a profit, the homeowner knows that the premiums being
charged are more than the policy’s theoretical value. Nonetheless, the homeowner is
willing to pay the extra premium for the privilege of knowing his family is protected
against calamity. In the same way, a portfolio manager who believes that his selection
of stocks will outperform the market may be willing to pay something more than
theoretical value to protect the value of the portfolio when the market moves against
him. If he believes that his portfolio will consistently appreciate by more than the cost
of the options, he may be willing to overpay since the options will protect him, while
at the same time leaving him ahead in the long run.

9. The OEX volatility index (VIX), disseminated by the Chicago Board Options Exchange, represents the
implied volatility of a theoretical at-the-money OEX option with 30 days remaining to expiration.


--- 第 339 页 ---

S 16

Intermarket Spreading

While most spreading takes place within one underlying stock, commodity, or index
{intramarket spreading), a trader need not limit himself to such a narrow playing field.
If a trader can identify a relationship between contracts in two different markets, and
finds that the instruments are mispriced relative to each other, it is possible to spread
one instrument or its derivative products against another instrument or its derivative
markets (intermarket spreading).

For example, suppose a trader follows two instruments, ABC and XYZ, and decides
that ABC will be stronger than XYZ over the next several months. Based on this
assessment, the trader might create a spread by purchasing ABC and selling XYZ.

Let’s assume the trader purchases ABC at its current price of 50, and sells XYZ at
its current price of 100. If ABC rises to 53 and XYZ falls to 98, the trader will show a
five-point profit since he can buy back the spread, which he originally sold for 50, at 45.
Note that it is not necessary for ABC to rise and XYZ to fall. If ABC rises to 60 and XYZ
rises to 105, the trader will still realize a five-point profit. Or if ABC falls to 47 and XYZ
falls to 92, the trader will realize the same five-point profit. All that is necessary is that
in total points ABC is stronger, or less weak, than XYZ.

Suppose that after initiating the spread, the trader finds that ABC has risen to 60,
while XYZ has risen to 115. The spread seems to have gone against the trader as it has
widened from the original price of 50 to 55. In point terms the trader was wrong since
XYZ was five points stronger than ABC. But many traders would still contend that ABC
was stronger than XYZ since ABC rose 20% (10/50) while XYZ only rose 15% (15/100)
over the same period. If a trader chooses to measure movement in percent terms, he
cannot simply buy ABC and sell XYZ. In order to equalize the percent price changes, his
spread must be long and short an equal number of points. In order to accomplish this,
for each 100-point XYZ contract the trader sells, he must purchase two 50-point ABC
contracts. Now he is long and short an equal number of points. If ABC rises to 60 (a
20% gain) and XYZ rises to 115 (a 15% gain), he will show a profit of:

2 x (60-50) ~- 1 x (115-100) =5

Tf ABC falls 6% to 47 and XYZ falls 10% to 90, the trader will likewise realize a profit
Since:

—2 x (50 — 47) + 1 x (100 - 90) = 4

Now in order to make a profit, ABC need only be stronger (or less weak) than XYZ in
Percent terms.

331


--- 第 340 页 ---

332 Chapter 16

In our example we tried to ensure that we were long and short the same number
of points on each side of our spread. However, the situation can be further complicated if
the point values of the instruments are unequal. Suppose that each point in ABC is worth
$400, while each point in XYZ is worth $100. Now if we buy two ABC contracts and sell
one XYZ contract to equalize the point values, we find that the dollar value of our ABC
position is $400 x 2 x 50 = $40,000, while the dollar value of our XYZ position is $100
x 1x 100 = $10,000. If ABC falls 6% to 47 and XYZ falls 10% to 90, the result will be:

[-2 x (50 - 47} x $400] + [1 x (100 - 90) x $100] = -$2,400

Even though ABC outperformed XYZ in percent terms, we still ended up losing because
the dollar values of each point were different.

The trader’s ultimate goal is to equalize the dollar value of each side of his spread.
If he wants to achieve this, he must ensure that:

(ABC contracts) x (price of ABC) x (point value of ABC) =
(XYZ contracts) x (price of XYZ) x (point value of XYZ)

He must therefore sell two contracts of XYZ for each one contract of ABC which he
buys, since:

1 x 50 x $400 = 2 x 100 x $100

Putting things in slightly different form, we can express the proper ratio of XYZ
contracts to ABC contracts required for a balanced spread as:

(price ABC / price XYZ) x (point value of ABC / point value of XYZ)
= (50 / 100) x (40/10)
= 2 (2:1 ratio)

Now suppose that instead of creating his spread using the underlying instruments
ABC and XYZ, the trader decides to create his spread using options on one or both
instruments. That is, the trader wants to get long ABC and/or short XYZ by either
buying or selling an appropriate number of options. A logical starting point might be to
consider the delta positions of each spread. In traditional terms each underlying contract
has a delta of 100, and if we buy one ABC contract and sell one XYZ contract we seem
to have a neutral spread. But we already know that the price and the point value of the
instruments are different. For purposes of intermarket spreading it might be useful to
consider the dollar delta ($delta) of each instrument, the total dollar value of the
contract divided by 100:

$delta = (contract price x point value) / 100

We can interpret the $delta as the dollar value change for a one-percent change in
the price of the underlying contract. This is slightly different than the traditional
interpretation of the delta, the change in a contract’s value for a one-point change in the
price of the underlying contract. However, the $delta makes it easier to create and
evaluate delta positions between instruments trading at different prices and with
different point values,


--- 第 341 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 333

Using the $delta calculations, for ABC we have a $delta of SO x $400 / 100 =
$200. For XYZ we have 100 x $100 / 100 = $100. For purposes of delta calculations
we can see that each delta of ABC is worth two deltas of XYZ. A balanced spread
therefore requires us to sell (buy) two deltas of XYZ for each one delta of ABC which
we buy (sell). This is simply another way of expressing the proper ratio of underlying
instruments required for a balanced spread.

We can also assign a $delta to an option by multiplying the $delta of the underlying
contract by the option’s delta, keeping in mind that, even though deltas are often
expressed in whole numbers for convenience, they really represent a percent or decimal
fraction:

option $delta = underlying $delta x option’s delta
An option’s $delta represents the dollar change in its theoretical value for a one percent
change in the price of the underlying contract. An ABC call with a delta of 80 has a
$delta of:
$200 x .80 = $160
An XYZ put with a delta of -30 has a $delta of:
$100 x -.30 = -$30

Given the $delta relationship, if we want to get long ABC and short XYZ, and we
want to have the same number of dollars at risk on each side of the spread, we need to
be long and short an equal number of $deltas. In other words, in a $delta neutral
position:

number of ABC contracts x contract delta x $delta of ABC
must equal
number of XYZ contracts x contract delta x $delta of XYZ

Suppose ABC and XYZ are futures contracts with the following options available:

ABC XYZ
Exercise Call Put Exercise Call Put
price delta delta price delta delta
45 80 20 | 95 70 _ 30
50 50 -50 100 50 -50
55 20 -80 105 30 -70

Some typical $delta neutral spreads might be:

long 10 ABC futures / short 40 XYZ 100 calls
long 10 ABC 45 calls / short 16 XYZ futures

long 10 ABC 50 calls / long 20 XYZ 100 puts
short 30 ABC 45 puts / long 40 XYZ 95 puts
long 35 ABC 55 calls / short 20 XYZ 95 calls


--- 第 342 页 ---

334 Chapter 16

Each of these spreads is essentially balanced, because our $delta position in ABC options
is exactly offset by an opposing $delta position in XYZ. Since we are always long ABC
deltas and short XYZ deltas, for small movements in the underlying contracts, each
spread will be profitable as long as ABC is stronger than XYZ.

Why would a trader consider taking a position in options rather than the underlying
instrument? When a trader considers an option’s theoretical value, in a sense he is
comparing the option’s value to the value of the underlying instrument. That is why the
correct use of an option’s theoretical value requires us to establish a hedge against the
underlying instrument. If options are underpriced compared to theoretical value, a
trader will want to buy options rather than take an equivalent position in the underlying
instrument; if options are overpriced compared to theoretical value, a trader will want
to sell options rather than take an equivalent position in the underlying instrument.
From an option trader’s point of view, the determination of whether options are
overpriced or underpriced depends on one’s opinion of volatility. If implied volatility is
low compared to a trader’s forecast, options are underpriced; if implied volatility is high,
options are overpriced. An option trader will prefer to take a position in the option
market rather than in the underlying instrument if he believes that implied volatility is
too low or too high.

In our example, if a trader is in agreement with the implied volatility in both ABC
and XYZ options, there is nothing to be gained by taking an option position rather than
a position in the underlying instrument. Suppose, however, that implied volatility in
ABC options is 22% but the trader believes that 24% is a more reasonable volatility. Now
options are underpriced. If the trader wants to take a long position in ABC as part of his
spread, he will be better off doing so by purchasing ABC calls. He will not only have his
intermarket spread, but will, at the same time, be creating a position with a positive
theoretical edge. On the other hand, if the trader believes that 20% is a reasonable
volatility for ABC options, but implied volatility is 22%, the trader will be better off
selling ABC puts. The sale of overpriced puts will create a long position in the ABC
market while also creating a positive theoretical edge.

A trader can take the same approach in the XYZ market. If he wants to take a short
position in XYZ as part of his intermarket spread, and believes implied volatility in XYZ
options is fairly priced, he can simply sell the underlying XYZ contract. Alternatively, if
he believes implied volatility is too low, he can buy puts; if he believes implied volatility
is too high, he can sell calls.

What types of markets lend themselves to intermarket spreading? Since a trader
who enters into an intermarket spread makes the assumption that there is a relationship
between the markets involved, the important question for most traders is the closeness
of that relationship. A trader is much more likely to construct an intermarket spread in
markets which have similar characteristics, or where the markets are driven by the same
forces, than in those where no apparent similarity exists. While a trader might find it
difficult to identify a relationship between corn and Deutschemarks, he might very well
find a relationship between corn and soybeans, or between Deutschemarks and Swiss
Francs. In the same way, he might not find a relationship between gold and the stock
of General Motors Corp., but he might find a relationship between gold and silver, or


--- 第 343 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 335

between General Motors Corp. stock and Ford Motor Co. stock. Clearly, some instru-
ments are more closely related than others. The closer the relationship, the more such
instruments lend themselves to intermarket spreading.

AN INTERMARKET HEDGE

Because intermarket spreading is most common in markets with close relationships, it
is not surprising that among the most common markets for intermarket spreading are
those where one or more products are derived from some other product. For example,
since both heating oil and gasoline are derived from crude oil one would expect price
movements in these three markets to be closely correlated. If demand rises for heating
oil or gasoline, forcing up the price of these products, then the price of crude oil is also
likely to rise. Similarly, if the supply of crude oil is disrupted and prices consequently
rise, then the price of gasoline and heating oil is also likely to rise.

Refiners who purchase crude oil and refine it into gasoline and heating oil are often
sensitive to the value of crack spreads, the spread between the price of crude oil and its
derivative products. For example, a refiner who purchases crude oil and refines it into
gasoline is concerned that the price of crude oil will rise and that the price of gasoline
will fall. If crude oil is at $19.00 per barrel and gasoline at $.5400 per gallon, the price
of a simple crude oil/gasoline crack spread is:!

($.54 x 42} - $19.00 = $3.68 per barrel

If the refiner is satisfied with the $3.68 profit margin, he might protect his position by
purchasing crude oil futures at $19.00 and selling an equal number of gasoline futures
at $.5400.2 If, however, he has an opinion on the volatility of either crude oil or gasoline,
and this opinion differs from the implied volatility in the option market, he can take
either position in options. If he feels that implied volatility in crude oil is unusually low
(high), he can take his long position by purchasing calls (selling puts). If he feels that
implied volatility in gasoline is unusually low (high), he can take his short position by
purchasing puts (selling calls).

While most intermarket spreads consist of opposing positions in two different
Markets, there is no reason why an intermarket spread cannot be extended to multiple
instruments. For example, some refining operations produce a combination of both
gasoline and heating oil. In a typical combination 3:2:1 crack spread, from each three
barrels of crude oil which the refiner purchases he expects to produce two barrels of
gasoline and one barrel of heating oil. With crude oil at $19.00 per barrel, gasoline at
$.5400 per gallon, and heating oil at $.5800 per gallon, the value of a3:2:1 crack spread
is;

((2 x 42 x $.5400) + (1 x 42 x $.5800) — (3 x $19.00) 7 3 = $4.24 per barrel

1. Since gasoline and heating oil are quoted in cents per gallon, and a barrel contains 42 gallons, the
gasoline or heating oil price must be multiplied by 42 in order to calculate its price per barrel.

2. Although this is not a $delta neutral position, since the dollars at risk in crude oil are not equal to the

dollars at risk in gasoline, it is still an intermarket spread since one market is being spread off against
another market.


--- 第 344 页 ---

336 Chapter 16

Again, if the refiner is satisfied with the $4.24 profit margin, he can simply buy crude
oil futures and sell gasoline and heating oil futures in a 3:2:1 ratio. For each three crude
oil futures which he purchases, he can sell two gasoline futures and one heating oil
future, If, however, the refiner has an opinion on the volatility of any of these products,
he may find it advantageous to take his long or short position in the option market rather
than in the futures market.

VOLATILITY RELATIONSHIPS

A close price relationship between markets may also mean that the markets have similar
volatility characteristics. This may enable the trader to identify mispriced options
without the necessity of picking the right volatility for either market. Returning to our
ABC and XYZ contracts, suppose that a trader thinks ABC will be stronger than XYZ,
and wants to take a long position in ABC and a short position in XYZ. If the implied
volatility of ABC is 20% and the implied volatility of XYZ is 24%, the trader might now
have reason to take his position in options rather than in the underlying instruments. If
the market were to rise, the trader expects ABC to go up faster than XYZ since ABC is
expected to be stronger than XYZ. In the trader’s estimation, ABC ought to have a
greater volatility. But the implied volatilities reflect the opposite view. The marketplace
seems to believe that if both ABC and XYZ rise in price, XYZ (with its implied volatility
of 24%) will rise more quickly than ABC (with its implied volatility of 20%). Clearly, the
prices in the marketplace do not reflect the trader’s opinion of market conditions. The
trader can take advantage of this situation by purchasing ABC calls and selling XYZ calls.

Note that the trader has not made any attempt to predict the right volatility for
either ABC or XYZ. He has simply made the assumption that the implied volatilities do
not reflect his view of market conditions.

If the trader wants to construct a $delta neutral spread he must still determine the
delta of the options involved. Since the $delta, like all deltas, is sensitive to changes in
volatility, it may seem that the trader will need a specific volatility to calculate the
$delta. He can avoid this problem if he decides to use at-the-money options. No matter
what the volatility, he knows that an at-the-money option will have a delta of approxi-
mately 50. If ABC is trading at 50 and XYZ is trading at 100, he can buy ABC 50 calls
with an implied volatility of 20%, and sell XYZ 100 calls with an implied volatility of
24%. If there are 70 days remaining to expiration, with interest rates at 6%, the price of
the ABC 50 call would be 1.73 (a dollar price of $692) and the price of the XYZ 100
call would be 4.14 (a dollar price of $414). Since the $delta of ABC is $200 and the
$delta of XYZ is $100, a typical $delta neutral spread might consist of purchasing 10
ABC 50 calls and selling 20 XYZ 50 calls. The value of such a spread at expiration is
shown in Figure 16-1.

In Figure {6-1 we can see that if ABC is stronger than XYZ, as the trader believes,
the spread will show an ever increasing profit as ABC continues to outperform XYZ.
Note that the trader will also show a profit if the market falls in both ABC and XYZ, or
if ABC and XYZ move up at the same rate. This is because the trader received more for
the XYZ options which he sold than he paid for the ABC options which he bought. If


--- 第 345 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 337

Figure 16-1: Long 10 ABC 50 Calls/Short 20 XYZ 100 Calls

ABC moves up twice
as fast as XYZ

ABC moves up 33% \ a °

faster than XYZ

oO
8
3 4
a
& a
5 a
bed ABC moves up at the
same rate as XYZ
lee FA
o+-
+ T “T T T T T T T T T T
48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60

ABC Price

the market falls and the entire position ends up worthless, or if ABC and XYZ move up
at the same rate, the trader is left with a profit equal to the excess price of XYZ options.
The only market conditions which would hurt this spread would be an upward move
in both ABC and XYZ, with XYZ outperforming ABC.

What action could the trader take if the implied volatilities were reversed, with
ABC having an implied volatility of 24% and XYZ having an implied volatility of 20%?
Now if ABC and XYZ both rise, the marketplace expects ABC to outperform XYZ. Since
this is also what the trader believes, there does not seem to be any opportunity. But
Suppose, instead of buying calls in ABC and selling calls in XYZ, the trader decides to
take his long position in ABC by selling puts, and his short position in XYZ by purchasing
Puts. Assuming, again, that he uses at-the-money puts which he knows to have a delta
of approximately -50, he might create a $delta neutral position by selling 10 ABC 50
puts and buying 20 XYZ 100 puts. If the market moves up, and ABC is stronger than
XYZ, all the options will collapse to zero. He will be left with a profit equal to the excess
Credit when he sold ABC 50 puts at an implied volatility of 24% and bought XYZ 100
Puts at an implied volatility of 20%. And if the market moves down, based on his
assumption that ABC will be stronger than XYZ, the trader expects XYZ to move down
more quickly than ABC. Hence, the XYZ puts will appreciate more rapidly than the ABC
puts, leaving the trader with an ever-increasing profit. The results of this strategy is
Shown in Figure 16-2.


--- 第 346 页 ---

Profit & Loss

338 Chapter 16

Figure 16-2: Short 10 ABC 50 Puts/Long 20 XYZ 100 Puts

XYZ moves down
~~ twice as fast as ABC
XYZ moves down sw
33% faster than ABC a
° “
[~~ a ~ oe ~
XYZ moves down a me :
the same rate as ABC OT 7
ae * ae
0 _ aL —_ a
T T T T T T T T T T T
40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52
ABC Price

In the foregoing examples we used at-the-money options which we knew to have
a delta of 50. What about using either in-the-money or out-of the-money options? Now
the situation becomes more complex. If we use at-the-money options we are only
required to determine that ABC and XYZ implied volatilities are mispriced with respect
to each other. If, however, we start to vary the options’ exercise prices, we need to
determine not only whether ABC and XYZ options are mispriced with respect to each
other, but also whether the individual implied volatilities are too high or too low.
Whenever options appear cheap because implied volatility is lower than a trader’s
volatility forecast, the trader will try to buy out-of-the- money options (options with
lower deltas). Whenever options appear expensive because implied volatility is higher
than a trader’s volatility forecast, the trader will try to sell out-of-the-money options.

For example, if ABC options not only appear too cheap with respect to XYZ options,
but also appear too cheap compared to a trader’s volatility forecast for ABC, the trader
will try to buy ABC options with smailer deltas and sell XYZ options with larger deltas.
Assuming the trader wants to be long ABC and short XYZ, he might buy ABC 55 calls
and sell XYZ 100 calls. Or he might buy ABC 50 calls and sell XYZ 95 calls. He is trying
to create an intermarket call backspread, by purchasing options with smaller deltas, and
selling options with larger deltas. In the same way, if ABC options appear too expensive
with respect to XYZ, and also appear too expensive compared to a trader’s volatility
forecast, he might take his long position in ABC by selling puts with lower deltas, and
take his short position in XYZ options by purchasing puts with higher deltas. This will


--- 第 347 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 339

create an intermarket put ratio vertical spread. Examples of an intermarket call
backspread and an intermarket put ratio vertical spread are shown in Figures 16-3 and
16-4. Note that such spreads are sensitive not only to the volatility relationship between
ABC and XYZ, but also to the general level of volatility. A backspread wants the market
to become more volatile; a ratio vertical spread wants the market to become less volatile.

INTERMARKET VOLATILITY SPREADS

Suppose a trader has decided that ABC and XYZ ought to have very similar volatilities,
put he finds that the implied volatility of ABC options, at 20%, is markedly different than
the implied volatility of XYZ options, at 25%. If the trader also believes that one market
will outperform the other, he might take a position by purchasing calls (puts) in one
market and selling calls (puts) in the other market. But suppose the trader has no opinion
on the relative strengths of the two markets. His only opinion is that options in one
market are too cheap or expensive in relation to options in the other market. He simply
wants to be long volatility in one market and short volatility in the other. What can he
do?

Suppose the trader purchases ABC calls and sells XYZ calls. If he is right about
volatility and both markets move in the same direction, he will always show some profit
(Figure 16-1}. But his profit will be greatest when ABC and XYZ rise in price. In the
same way, if the trader purchases ABC puts and sells XYZ puts, he will always show

Figure 16-3: Long 21 ABC 55 Calls/Short 12 XYZ 95 Calls

ABC moves up 33% i
faster than XYZ, or moves if
down 33% slower than XYZ pf

ABC moves up twice as ry
fast as XYZ, or moves af
down half as fast as XYZ

Profit & Loss

o+

ABC and XYZ move up and
down at the same rate a

eS T T T TT T T T T T T Toto
40 41 42 43 44 #45 #46 #47 #48 #49 «50 #51 52 5&3 54 55 56 57 58 59 60
ABC Price


--- 第 348 页 ---

340 Chapter 16

Figure 16-4: Short 21 ABC 45 Puts/Long 12 XYZ 105 Puts

ABC moves up twice as
fast as XYZ, or moves
down half as tast as XYZ

Profit & Loss
~

ABC and XYZ move up and
down at the same rate

ABC moves up 33%
faster than XYZ, or moves
down 33% slower than XYZ

+4 T T T T T T T T T TT T T T T T T T T
40 41 42 43 44 45 #46 47 #48 #49 SO 51 52 53 54 5S 56 57 SB S89 60
ABC Price

some profit (Figure 16-2). But now his profit will be greatest when ABC and XYZ fall in
price. A trader who has only a volatility opinion can combine these strategies to create
an intermarket spread which is based solely on the assumption of a mispriced volatility
relationship between the two markets. That is, the trader can buy straddles or strangles
in one market and sell straddles or strangles in the other market.

Since the trader is not taking a position on what the correct volatility is for ABC or
for XYZ, but rather on the relative volatility between the two markets, he can’t
determine the exact delta for the options. The easiest way to solve this problem is to
focus on at-the-money straddles. Regardless of the correct volatility, he knows that
at-the-money options have deltas of approximately 50.

Suppose the trader decides to buy 20 ABC SO straddles. How many XYZ 100
straddles should he sell if he wants the value of the total position to be dependent only
on the volatility relationship between the two markets? The trader can think of his
position as an ABC/XYZ call spread, combined with an ABC/XYZ put spread. Since
ABC has a $delta of $200, the trader’s total $delta position in ABC 50 calls is:

20 x $200 x .50 = $2000

The $delta of XYZ is $100, so each XYZ call has a $delta of $100 x .SO = $50. The
correct number of XYZ calls to sell is therefore:

$2,000 / $50 = 40


--- 第 349 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 341

The arithmetic is essentially the same for ABC and XYZ puts, each having a delta of -50.
If the trader buys 10 ABC 50 puts, his $delta position is:

10 x $200 x -.50 = -$2000

With the $delta for the XYZ 100 put of -$50 we need to sell 40 XYZ 100 puts to balance
the 20 ABC 50 puts which we purchased. The complete position is:

long 20 ABC 50 calls short 40 XYZ 100 calls
long 20 ABC 50 puts short 40 XYZ 100 puts

The value of this position at expiration is shown in Figure 16-5.

Note in Figure 16-5 that if ABC and XYZ move at the same rate, the position will
always show a profit equal to the excess premium received for XYZ options (implied
volatility = 25%) over the premium paid for ABC options (implied volatility = 20%).
Suppose the implied volatilities of 20% for ABC and 25% for XYZ turn out to he correct.
This means that XYZ will move 25% faster than ABC since 25/20 = 1.25. If this happens
we can see from Figure 16-5 that the spread will now act like a short straddle, showing
its maximum value if the market sits still and showing a loss if the market makes a big
move.

If the trader believes that XYZ will move faster than ABC, as indicated by the
implied volatilities, he might alter the ratio. If XYZ does have a volatility 25% greater
than ABC, the trader can rebalance the spread by purchasing 25% more ABC straddles
than he originally intended. Instead of purchasing 20 ABC straddles he can purchase 25
ABC straddles. The effect of doing the spread in this new ratio is shown in Figure 16-6.

We can see from Figure 16-6 that in the new size of 25 x 40 the spread breaks even
if XYZ does move 25% faster than ABC. But the position acts like a long straddle if ABC
and XYZ move at the same rate. In the new size of 25 x 40 the volatility difference
between the two contracts has become a factor in determining the correct ratio.
Originally, the trader balanced his spread based on the following relationship:

ABC contracts x $delta of ABC x ABC option delta
must equal
XYZ contracts x $delta of XYZ x XYZ option delta

But taking into consideration the different volatilities of the two contracts, the spread fs
now balanced if:

ABC contracts x $delta of ABC x ABC option delta x ABC volatility
equals
XYZ contracts x $delta of XYZ x XYZ option delta x XYZ volatility

Our XYZ call position is:
40 x $100 x 50 x .25 = $500
Taking into consideration the volatility, each ABC call has a $delta of
$200 x .50 x .20 = $20


--- 第 350 页 ---

342 Chapter 16

Figure 16-5: Long 20 ABC 50 Calls/Long 20 ABC 50 Puts
Short 40 XYZ 100 Calls/Short 40 XYZ 100 Puts

ABC and XYZ move up and
down at the same rate

Profit & Loss
id

XYZ moves up and down :
25% faster than ABC . a

T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T 7 T T
40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 #48 #49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60
ABC Price

Therefore, the proper number of ABC contracts required to balance the spread is
500/20, or 25 contracts. The spread is now completely balanced since:

25 x $200 x .50 x .20 = 40 x $100 x .50 x .25

We can see that the volatility relationship between the two contracts can be an
important factor in determining the proper ratio in an intermarket volatility spread.
Since predicting the correct volatility of even one underlying contract can be such a
difficult task, what chance does the trader have of being correct about the volatility of
two different contracts? The important consideration in an intermarket spread is not
necessarily the volatility of each individual contract, but the volatility relationship
between the contracts. If a trader can determine the relationship, the actual volatility
might not affect the spread value. For example, if we determine that XYZ is always 25%
more volatile than ABC, the actual volitilities of ABC and XYZ don’t really matter. The
ratio is the same whether the volatility of ABC is 20% and XYZ is 25%, or ABC is 12%
and XYZ is 15%, or ABC is 28% and XYZ is 35%. In each case XYZ is 25% more volatile
than ABC, so the ratio of XYZ to ABC is the same.

Is it possible to identify markets with well defined volatility relationships? While
there can be no absolute answer, some markets do seem to be so closely related that
their volatilities take on a well defined relationship.


--- 第 351 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 343

Profit & Loss

Figure 16-6: Long 25 ABC 50 Calls/Long 25 ABC 50 Puts
Short 40 XYZ 100 Calls/Short 40 XYZ 100 Calis

ABC and XYZ move up and
down at the same rate

XYZ moves up and down
25% faster than ABC

“T T T T ~“T “T- tT T T T —~T T TT T T T T T T
40 41 42 43 44 #45 #46 47 #48 #49 #50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60
ABC Price

For example, several indexes exist which track the performance of the U.S. stock
market. Not only might we expect these indexes to move up or down together, at least
over longer periods of time, but we might also expect them to have similar volatility
characteristics. As an example, the 50-day historical volatilities of two of these indexes,
the S&P 100 (OEX) and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index (NYA), are
shown in Figure 16-7. There is clearly some relationship between the volatility of these
two indexes, but how close is the relationship? To help answer the question, NYA
volatility has been plotted as a percent of OEX volatility in Figure 16-8. We can see that
NYA volatility is typically somewhere between 80% and 95% of OEX volatility. As a
rough estimate we might decide that on average NYA volatility is approximately 87%
of OEX volatility.

Suppose we find that OEX options, traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange,
and NYA options, traded on the New York Stock Exchange, are trading at approximately
the same implied volatility. Since we expect the NYA to be approximately 13% less
volatile than the OEX, how can we construct a strategy which exploits this apparent
mispricing between OEX and NYA options? If we decide to buy at-themoney OEX
straddles and sell at-the-money NYA straddles, and also take into consideration the
relative volatilities of the two markets, we know that in a balanced spread:


--- 第 352 页 ---

Chapter 16

344

ze-6ny zéudvy L6-A0N «1é6INr =16-484 06RO o6-AeW 68908q «66e-Bny 68idy gg-AONog8-INT
a a 1

AyBEIOA jedL20)s1Y
Aep OS VAN

vl >
5
3
c
2
ot nN
a
<
a
st 2
=
AUWEIOA Jeo0}s1Y4 lord ES
Aep 0S X30 ~
rod
z
Lo 9¢

ANINEIOA [29U0}SIH WAN SNSIOA XAO +2-91 anBi4


--- 第 353 页 ---

345

Intermarket Spreading

ze-Gny = ze-1dy

—— es |

L6-AON

Le-Inr = 16-484 «06190 «o6-AeW «6682eq «68Bny 68-idy s8-AON  88-int
L L 1 i 1 t 1 SL

%00t

AuneIOA XJO Jo JUeose & se AYINEIOA WAN ‘8-91 aunbly



--- 第 354 页 ---

346 Chapter 16

number of OEX straddles x OEX $delta x .87
must equal
number of NYA straddles x NYA $delta

Suppose the OEX is at 440 and the NYA is at 260. Since both contracts have the same
point value of $100, the $deltas for the two indexes are:

OEX $delta = 440 x $100 / 100 = $440
NYA $delta = 260 x $100 / 100 = $260

For each NYA straddle which we sell, we must purchase .87 x 260/440, or approxi-
mately .51 OEX straddles. If we were to purchase 20 OEX 440 straddles, a balanced
intermarket volatility spread would require us to sell approximately 39 NYA 260
straddles, since 39 x .51 = 20. Our spread might consist of:

long 20 OEX 440 calls / long 20 OEX 440 puts
short 39 NYA 260 calls / short 39 NYA 260 calls

If the OEX straddles are purchased and the NYA straddles sold at the same implied
volatility, the value of the position at expiration is shown in Figure 16-9.

Note that if both contracts move in the same direction and, as we expect, NYA
volatility is 87% of OEX volatility, the position shows a constant profit equal to the
expected 13% difference in the volatilities. Even if we double or triple volatility, the
profit to the position will be identical, as jong as NYA volatility is 87% of OEX volatility.

We can see from Figure 16-8 that NYA volatility need not be exactly 87% of OEX
volatility. What will our position look like if NYA volatility turns out to be near the upper
range of OEX volatility, perhaps 95%, or near the lower range of OEX volatility, perhaps
80%. These two possibilities have also been plotted in Figure 16-9. In the former case
our position will begin to act like a short straddle, and any increase in volatility will
reduce the value of the position. In the latter case our position will begin to act like a
long straddle, and any increase in volatility will increase the value of the position.
Obviously, if we were to focus on a risk to our position, the risk would be that NYA
volatility would increase relative to OEX volatility. Even with this risk the spread still
looks very attractive since we have considerable margin for error.

Ina typical volatility spread a trader often focuses on the delta, gamma, theta, and
vega characteristics of the spread. We might also want to consider these sensitivities
with respect to an intermarket spread. Just as we found it convenient to calculate a
$delta to compare contracts in different markets, we will also find it convenient to
calculate the $gamma, $theta, and $vega. The definitions and interpretations are:

$gamma = underlying $delta x option’s gamma x underlying point value / 100

(the change in an option’s $delta for a one-percent change in the price of the underlying
contract}

$theta = underlying point value x option’s theta
(the doliar change in an option’s theoretical value with the passage of one day)


--- 第 355 页 ---

Profit & Loss

Intermarket Spreading

347

Figure 16-9: Long 20 OEX 440 Calls/Long 20 OEX 440 Puts

Short 39 NYA 260 Calls/Short 39 NYA 260 Puts

Se

7M NYA volatility is 80%
are of OEX volatility a
~~ ~ ~ _ N ‘A volatili ‘%
~ YA volatility is 87
~ ae of OEX volatility
oe
a NYA volatility is 95%
“ “ of OEX volatility a
() = ——
T T T T T T TT T T T T T T T “T
400 405 410 415 420 426 430 435 440 445 450 455 460 465 470 475 480
OEX Price

$vega = underlying point value x option’s vega

(the dollar change in an option’s theoretical value for a one-percentage-point change in

volatility)

If we use implied volatilities of 11%, an interest rate of 5%, and assume 70 days
Temaining to expiration, the dollar sensitivities for several OEX and NYA options might
be approximately the following:3

OEX = 440.00;
volatility = 11%;

NYA = 260.00;
volatility = 11%;

Option

OEX 425 call
OEX 440 call
OEX 455 call

time to expiration = 70 days;
interest rate = 5%
time to expiration = 70 days;
interest rate = 5%

$delta $gamma
364 23
259 36
140 33

$theta $vega
8.57 49
9.29 75
6.87 69

3. These figures are approximations only. While early exercise was taken into consideration through the
use of the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, no dividends were used. In addition, the numbers have been
rounded for convenience.


--- 第 356 页 ---

348 Chapter 16

Option ‘ $delta  $gamma _—_‘$theta $vega
OEX 425 put -81 25 -3.09 $1
OEX 440 put ~196 42 -4,00 74
OEX 455 put 339 43 -2.36 54
NYA 250 call 221 13 -4.93 27
NYA 260 call 152 21 -5.49 44
NYA 270 call 75 18 -4.05 39
NYA 250 put -4] 13 ~1.85 28
NYA 260 put 117 24 2.36 44
NYA 270 put 211 26 -1.26 28
The total dollar sensitivities of our OEX/NYA position is:

Position $delta $gamma $theta $vega
long 20 OEX 440 calls 5180 720 —185.80 1500
long 20 OEX 440 puts -3920 840 -80.00 1480
short 39 NYA 260 calls 5928 ~-819 214.11 -1716
short 39 NYA 260 puts 4563 -936 92.04 -1716
Totals ~105 -195 +40.35 -452

How can we interpret these sensitivities? Although the $delta of -105 indicates a
preference for the market to fall rather than rise, in practice most traders would consider
the position essentially $delta neutral since the preference is only very slight. In relative
terms the $delta of -105 represents a position which is short only about 24% of an OEX
contract (with a $delta of 440), or about 40 percent of an NYA contract (with a $delta
of 260).

But why does the position have a negative $gamma, positive $theta, and negative
vega?

The total negative $gamma of -195 seems to suggest that movement in the
underlying contracts will hurt our position. If both the OEX and NYA were to move at
the same rate, we can see from Figure 16-9 that this would indeed be true. But we don’t
expect the OEX and the NYA to move at the same rate; we expect the NYA to move at
only 87 percent the rate of the OEX. If we multiply our NYA $gamma position by .87,
and then add it to our OEX $gamma position, it turns out that the total $gamma is very
close to zero:°

(720 + 840) — .87 x (819 + 936} = 33

This reflects the fact that we are relatively insensitive to movement in the two indexes
as long as the NYA moves at 87% the rate of the OEX.

4. In a perfectly balanced intermarket spread the total $delta, $gamma, $theta, and $vega would in fact
add up to exactly zero.

5. Ibid.


--- 第 357 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 349

The same reasoning applies to our $vega position. The total negative $vega of -452
suggests that an increase in volatility will hurt our position. If the volatility of the OEX
and NYA were to increase by the same amount this would be true. But if volatility rises,
we expect NYA volatility to rise by only 87% of OEX volatility. If we multiply our NYA
$vega position by .87, and then add it to our OEX $vega position, the total the total
$vega is approximately zero:°

(1500 + 1480) - .87 x (1716 + 1716) =-6

This reflects the fact that we are insensitive to changes in volatility as long as NYA
volatility is 87% of OEX volatility.

From these examples, we can see that the actual $gamma, $theta, and $vega
positions should reflect the relative volatilities of the underlying contracts. In our
example we have:

total $gamma = OEX $gamma + (NYA $gamma x [NYA volatility/OEX volatility]}
total $theta = OEX $theta + (NYA $theta x [NYA volatility/OEX volatility])
total $vega = CEX $vega + (NYA $vega x [NYA volatiliry/OEX volatility}

When we do this, we find that our intermarket spread is insensitive to price movement,
to the passage of time, and to changes in volatility, as long as the NYA moves at 87%
the rate of the OEX.

Suppose that instead of selling at-the-money NYA straddles to offset our purchased
at-the-money OEX straddles, we decided to sell NYA strangles. For example, we might
establish the following $delta neutral position:

buy 20 OEX 440 calls sell 69 NYA 270 calls
buy 20 OEX 440 puts sell 96 NYA 250 puts

Since the OEX 440 call has a $delta of 259 and the NYA 270 call has a $delta of 75, for
each OEX 440 call we buy, we must sell 259/75, or approximately 3.45 NYA 270 calls.
In the same way, since each OEX 440 put has a $delta of -196 and each NYA 250 put
has a delta of -41, for each OEX 440 put which we buy, we must sell 196/41, or
approximately 4.78 NYA 250 puts. Having purchased 20 OEX 440 straddles, to
establish a $delta neutral intermarket spread we must sell 69 NYA 270 calls and 96 NYA
250 puts.
The sensitivities of this position are:

Position $delta $gamma $theta $vega
long 20 OEX 440 calls 5180 720 -185.80 1500
long 20 OEX 440 puts -3920 840 -80.00 1480
short 69 NYA 270 calls -5175 —1242 279.45 —2691
short 96 NYA 250 puts 3936 -1248 177.60 2688

Taking into consideration the multiplication factor of .87 for the NYA $gamma,
$theta, and $vega, the total sensitivities for our spread are:

6. Ibid,


--- 第 358 页 ---

350 Chapter 16

$delta = 5180 — 3920 —- 5175 + 3936 = +21

$gamma = 720 + 840 — .87 x (1242 + 1248] = -606

$theta = —185.80 — 80.00 + .87 x (279.45 + 177.60) = +131.83
$vega = 1500 + 1480 ~ .87 x (2691 + 2688) =-1700

Even though the $delta position is approximately neutral, the negative $gamma,
positive $theta, and negative $vega suggest that the spread will act like a short straddle:
any large move in the underlying market or increase in volatility will hurt the position,
and the passage of time or a decline in volatility will help the position. If we do such a
spread, we are not only taking a position on the relative volatilities of the two underlying
markets, we are also taking a position that the implied volatilities in the two markets
are too high.

What type of position would we initiate if the relative volatilities were incorrect,
and at the same time the trader felt that implied volatilities were too low? In this case
we would try to create a position with a positive $gamma, negative $theta, and positive
$vega. For example, we might buy the OEX 425/455 strangle and sell the NYA 260
straddle:

buy 20 OEX 425 calls sell 18 NYA 260 calls
buy 20 OEX 455 puts sell 14 NYA 260 puts

Since the OEX 455 call has a $delta of 140 and the NYA 260 call has a $delta of 152,
for each OEX 455 call we buy, we must sell 140/152, or approximately .92 NYA 260
calls. In the same way, since each OEX 425 put has a $delta of -81 and each NYA 260
put has a delta of -117, for each OEX 455 put which we buy, we must sell 81/117, or
approximately .69 NYA 260 puts. Having purchased 20 OEX 425/455 strangles, to
establish a $delta neutral intermarket spread we must sell approximately 18 NYA 260
calls and 14 NYA 260 puts.
The sensitivities of this position are:

Position $delta $gamma $theta $vega
long 20 OEX 455 calls 2800 660 -137.40 1380
long 20 OEX 425 puts —2736 500 -61.80 1020
short 18 NYA 260 calls -1620 -378 98.82 -792
short 16 NYA 260 puts 1638 336 33.04 -616

Taking into consideration the multiplication factor of .87 for the NYA $gamma,
$theta, and $vega, the total sensitivities for our spread are:

$delta = 2800 — 2736 - 1620 + 1638 = +82

$gamma = 660 + 500 — .87 x (378 + 336} =-1781

$theta = -137.40 - 61.80 + .87 x (98.82 + 33.04) = +84.48
$vega = 1380 + 1020-87 x (792 + 616) =-1175

The positive $gamma, negative $theta, and positive $vega suggest that the spread
will act like a long straddle: any large move in the underlying market or increase in


--- 第 359 页 ---

Intermarket Spreading 351

volatility will help the position, and the passage of time or a decline in volatility will hurt
the position. If we do such a spread, we are not only taking a position on the relative
volatilities of the two underlying markets, we are also takinga position that the implied
volatilities in the two markets are too low.

While intermarket volatility spreads begin with a trader’s opinion about the relative
volatilities in two different markets, such spreads can be carried one step further. When
the implied volatilities appear to be incorrect with respect to each other, the trader can
simply buy straddles in the market which is relatively cheap and sell straddles in the
market which is relatively expensive. However, if the trader also has an opinion that
implied volatilities in the two markets are generally too high or too low, by taking an
appropriate $gamma and $vega position the trader can create volatility spreads which
also exploit this mispricing. Depending on his opinion, he will want to create one of the
four basic types of volatility spreads:

positive $gamma / positive $vega (backspread]

negative $gamma / negative $vega (ratio vertical spread)
negative $gamma / positive $vega (long time spread)
positive $gamma / negative $vega (short time spread)

For a more detailed discussion of volatility spreads and their characteristics, the reader
should refer to Chapter 8.

OPTIONS ON SPREADS

There is one last type of intermarket spread worth mentioning. Even though such
spreads are not currently traded on exchanges, it is possible to create an option where
the value of the option at expiration depends on a spread between two different
underlying markets. For example, suppose two underlying markets, ABC and XYZ, are
trading at 175 and 150, respectively. The ABC over XYZ spread is therefore trading at
25. If a trader believes this spread might widen to as much as 60 points, he might like
to buy an option on the spread with an exercise price below the projected spread of 60.
If he buys a spread with an exercise price of 25, and the spread does widen to 60 at
expiration, he will receive a payoff of 35, the difference between the 60-point spread
and the 25-point exercise price.

Such a spread is not as exotic as it sounds, since there are many situations where
a trader might believe that a spread will expand or contract over time. A portfolio
manager might believe that the stock market of one country will outperform the stock
market of another country. If such an option were available, the manager might want
to buy a call option on the spread between the stock indexes of the two countries. If the
spread widened to the point where it was greater than the chosen exercise price, the
Call would go into-the: money and would have unlimited profit potential. If the spread
either failed to widen or narrowed, the call would finish out-of-the-money and the
manager's loss would be limited to the amount he paid for the call.”

7. Ofcourse, such an option would be complicated by the relative values of the currencies involved. The
buyer of the option would have to devise a method of offsetting the currency risk.


--- 第 360 页 ---

352 Chapter 16

Note that the underlying value of an option on a spread might take on a negative
value. The ABC over XYZ spread, with ABC at 175 and XYZ at 150, has a value of 25,
But if ABC rises to 185 while XYZ rises to 200, the spread will have a value of -15.
Most traditional theoretical pricing models, with their assumption of a lognormal
distribution, do not allow for negative prices for the underlying contract. If one were to
create a pricing model to evaluate options on spreads, a more realistic assumption might
be a normal distribution, which does allow for negative prices. Such a variation on the
Black-Scholes model has been suggested in a paper prepared by Darrell Wilcox. This
variation is reproduced in Appendix B.


--- 第 361 页 ---

a 17 &

Position Analysis

When a trader first enters an option market, his initial concern is usually finding
strategies with sufficient profit potential to justify making a trade. As a trader becomes
more actively involved in options, he finds that an increasingly greater portion of his
time is spent analyzing the positions he has already taken. What are the risks to the
position? What are the rewards? And what action should be taken if market conditions
change either in the trader’s favor or against him? Simple volatility spreads, directional
spreads, or arbitrage strategies are relatively easy to analyze. As positions become more
complex, the risks associated with the position may not be as easy to identify.

The first step in analyzing a position is to determine how the position will react to
changing market conditions. One way to accomplish this is by looking at the total risk
sensitivities of the position (delta, gamma, theta, vega, rho). Unfortunately, the risk
sensitivities are only reliable under narrowly defined market conditions, Since it is often
dramatic changes in market conditions about which a trader must be concerned, simply
looking at the risk sensitivities rarely enables a trader to grasp fully the risks associated
with a position. Moreover, most traders find it easier to interpret graphic information
than a series of numbers. For all of these reasons, it is oftenuseful to graph a position’s
value under a variety of market conditions.

SOME SIMPLE EXAMPLES
Let’s start with a simple position:!

Stock price = 99.00; Time to June expiration = 7 weeks
Volatility = 20%; Interest rate = 6%; Dividend = 0

Option Option Option Option

Position Price Th. Val. Delta Imp. Vol.
long 10 June 95 calls 6.25 5.82 76 23.7
short 30 June 105 calls 1.63 1.08 26 24.5

The position is a typical ratio vertical call spread which we might take if we feel that
implied volatility is too high, as it appears to be here. The total theoretical edge is:

—10 x (6.25-5.82) + 30 x (1.63-1.08) = +12.20

1. The analyses in this chapter were done using elther the Black-Scholes model for stock options or the
Black model for futures options.

353


--- 第 362 页 ---

354 Chapter [7

While the position is currently delta neutral, we know that a ratio vertical spread has a
negative gamma, positive theta, and negative vega. The gamma, theta, and vega
sensitivities of the spread confirm this:

Option Gamma Theta Vega
June 95 call . 4.3 -.0344 13
June 105 call 4,4 -.0278 117
position totals -89.0 +.4900 ~2,380

The negative gamma is an indication that any large move in the underlying stock
will hurt the position. This is shown in Figure 17-1a. Under current conditions, if the
stock price begins to fall and we want to remain delta neutral, for each point decline in
the stock price we will need to sell approximately 89 shares of stock (or take some
similar negative delta action). If the stock begins to rise, for each point rise in the stock
price, we will need to buy approximately 89 shares of stock.

A ratio vertical spread also has a positive theta, so the passage of time will help the
position. This is confirmed in Figure 17-1b where the value of the position is shown as
the time remaining to expiration grows shorter. Note that not only does the position’s
potential profit change as time passes, the risks associated with the position also change.
As time passes the deltas of options tend to move away from 50, with the delta of
in-the-money options moving towards 100 and the delta of out-of-the-money options

Figure 17-1a: Long 10 June 95 Calls @ 6.25
Short 30 June 105 Calls @ 1.63

207

-20-4|

-307

theoretical profit & loss

-407

-607

-70 T T T 7 T re ee 7 +
90 92 94 96 98 100 102 104 106 108 110
stock price



--- 第 363 页 ---

Position Analysis 355

Figure 17-1b: Long 10 June 95 Calis @ 6.25
Short 30 June 105 Calls @ 1.63

400

at expiration
1 week to expiration

805

3
g
3
8
a
8
e
a
Qo
£
-20-4 4 weeks to expiration —
\
‘
-404 7 weeks to expiration
-604
-B04— T T “T mu T tT TT T T
90 92 94 96 98 100 102 104 106 108 110
stock price

moving towards zero. The net effect is that with the stock price anywhere below 105
our delta position will be getting longer as time passes. If, however, the stock price rises
above 105, the 95 call and the 105 call will be in-the-money, and the deltas of both
options will move towards 100. This will cause our delta position to become shorter
with the passage of time. This is shown in Figure 17-1b where the downward slope of
the graph above 105 becomes more pronounced as time passes.

Gamma can also change as time passes. Atthe-money options always have the
highest gamma, and the gamma of an at-the-money option can increase rapidly as
expiration approaches. As time passes note how the curvature of the position becomes
more severe around the stock price of 105. If the stock should rise to 105 and remain
there as expiration approaches, the position will take on increasingly greater gamma
risk.

Since a ratio vertical spread has a negative vega, any rise in volatility will hurt the
position, and any decline will help. The theoretical value of the position at various
volatilities is shown in Figure 17-1c. Under current conditions the position has an
implied volatility of approximately 25%, the volatility at which the position approxi-
mately breaks even, showing neither profit nor loss. (We can also approximate the
implied volatility of the position by dividing the total theoretical edge of 12.20 by the
vega of 2.38, and adding the result to the 20% volatility we are currently using.) If the
stock price should change, the implied volatility of the position will also change. At a


--- 第 364 页 ---

356

40

Chapter {7
Figure 17-1c: Long 10 June 95 Calls @ 6.25
Short 30 June 105 Calls @ 1.63
volatility = 15%
\.
‘\

theoretical profit & loss

volatility = 20%

-607

volatility = 25%

volatility = 30%

~100 T T T T T T
90 92 94 96 98 100 102

Stock price

stock price of 104, the position has an implied volatility of approximately 20%. At a
stock price of 106, the position has an implied volatility of approximately 15%. As the

stock price rises, we hope for a lower and lower volatility.

The delta risk will also change as volatility changes since deltas move away from
50 as volatility falls and towards 50 as volatility rises. If volatility falls, the position will
become delta positive; if volatility rises, the position will become delta negative. We can
see this by tooking at the slope of the graph at the current stock price of 99. With a
volatility below 20%, the graph has a positive slope; with a volatility above 20%, the

graph has a negative slope.
Let’s look at another position:

Stock price = 100.00
Time to expiration: June = 7 weeks, September = 20 weeks
Volatility = 20%; Interest rate = 6%; Dividend = 0

Option Option
Position Price Th. Val.
long 20 June 105 calls 1.88 1.35
short 20 September 110 calls 3.13 2.22

Option
Delta
30
30

Option
Imp. Vol.
24.0
24.1


--- 第 365 页 ---

Position Analysis 357

This position is a diagonal spread, but with both options having equal deltas the position
will tend to act like a short time spread. The total theoretical edge is:

-20 x (1.88-1.35) + 20 x (3.13-2.22] = +7.60

We know that a short time spread has a positive gamma, negative theta, and negative
vega. The gamma, theta, and vega sensitivities of the spread are:

Option Gamma Theta Vega
June 105 call 4.3 -.0308 128
September 110 call 2.8 -.0200 216
position totals +30.0 -.2160 -.760

The positive gamma means that movement in the underlying stock price is working in
our favor, as shown in Figure 17-2a. As the stock price rises, our delta position is
becoming longer, and as the stock price falls, it is becoming shorter. If we want to stay
delta neutral we will need to sell stock as the price rises, and buy stock as the price falls.

Since a positive gamma is always accompanied by a negative theta, the passage of
time will work against us, as shown in Figure 17-2b. Under current conditions, for each
day that passes with no movement in the underlying stock price, our position will
deteriorate by approximately .216. We can also see that with the stock below 105 the
slope of the graph becomes negative as time passes, reflecting the fact that our delta

Figure 17-2a: Long 20 June 105 Calls @ 1.88
Short 20 September 110 Calls @ 3.13

90

i
|
80- i

theoretical profit & loss

OF T T T T
80 85 90 95 100 105 410 WS 120 125 130

stock price


--- 第 366 页 ---

358 Chapter 17

Figure 17-2b: Long 20 June 105 Calls @ 1.88
Short 20 September 110 Calls @ 3.13

100

80-4

7 weeks to June expiration |
405
4 weeks to June expiration

theoretical profit & loss

. a 1 week to June expiration

-204 |
NA at June expiration
-407 T T T T T T T T
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130
stock price

position is becoming shorter with the passage of time. If the stock price should rise above
105, our delta position becomes longer with the passage of time. At June expiration we
want the stock to be as far away from 105 as possible.

As the stock price moves toward 105, the curvature of the position also becomes
more severe, reflecting the fact that the gamma of an at-the-money option increases with
the passage of time.

In Figure 17-2c we can see how the position’s value declines (rises) with rising
(falling) volatility. The implied volatility of the position is just under 25%.

While changing volatility can affect the delta and gamma of a position, we can see
in Figure 17-2c that in this spread the delta and gamma are generally unaffected by
changes in volatility. Regardless of volatility, the delta position remains neutral at the
current stock price of 100, becomes shorter anywhere below 100, and becomes longer
anywhere above 100. Moreover, the graphs all have the same general shape, reflecting
the fact that the position’s gamma is not particularly sensitive to changes in volatility.

GRAPHING A POSITION

Every trader should know what a graph of his position looks like, if not in minute detail
at least the approximate characteristics of the position. Sometimes, if a computer is
unavailable to do the graphing for us, we might have to mentally visualize such a graph.


--- 第 367 页 ---

Position Analysis 359

Figure 17-2c: Long 20 June 105 Calls @ 1.88
Short 20 September 110 Calls @ 3.13

100

volatility = 15 “
Vi

volatility = 20%
J

604

|
40-

theoretical profit & loss

- Pa volatility = 25%
oa volatility = 30%

-20+F T T 1 t T T T T T
80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130

stock price

From the foregoing examples, perhaps we can formulate some rules which will enable
us to do this.

Using, as before, a grid where the horizontal axis (x-axis) represents movement in
the underlying contract and the vertical axis (y-axis) represents profit or loss, we can
interpret the theoretical edge, delta, and gamma as follows:

1. Theoretical Edge—The graph of a position with a positive theoretical edge will
cross the current underlying price at a point above the zero profit & loss line. This
is the first thing a trader should look for. When a trader is right about market
conditions, he wants to know that his position will be profitable.

2. Delta (Figure 17-3a]—A positive delta is theoretically equivalent to a long
position in the underlying contract. The graph of such a position will cross the
current underlying price at an angle extending from the lower left to the upper
tight. A negative delta is theoretically equivalent to a short position in the underly-
ing contract. The graph of this position will cross the current underlying price at an
angle extending from the upper left to the lower right. The exact slope of the graph
as it crosses the current underlying price is determined by the magnitude of the
delta. As the delta position becomes larger, the slope becomes more severe; as the
delta position becomes smaller, the slope becomes less severe. The graph of a


--- 第 368 页 ---

360

Chapter 17

Figure 17-3a: Positive and Negative Delta (Slope)

positive delta
(graph extends from lower
left to upper right)

negative delta
(graph extends from upper
left to lower right)

position which is delta neutral will be exactly horizontal as it crosses the current
price of the underlying contract.

3. Gamma (Figure 17-3b}—A positive gamma position will begin to bend upward
as the underlying price moves away from the current price in either direction. This
reflects the fact that a positive gamma position likes movement. The graph of such
a position will take on a generally convex shape (a smile). A negative gamma
position will begin to bend downward as the underlying price moves away from
the current price in either direction. This reflects the fact that a negative gamma
position prefers for the market to sit still. The graph of such a position will take on
a generally concave shape (a frown).

In order to complete a graph there is one other piece of information we need.

Suppose the underlying contract makes such a large upward move that all calls go

into-

the-money and all puts go out-of-the money, or such a large downward move that

all puts go into-the-money and all calls go out-of-the-money. In other words, what will
the graph of a position look like at the extreme right or left tail? We can determine this
by adding up our contract or lot position. This is a measure of how many contracts a
position will be naked long or short if the underlying market makes such a large move

that

either all calls or all puts act like underlying contracts.
On the upside (extreme right tail) all puts will collapse to zero while all calls will

eventually act like long underlying contracts. The graph of a position which is long more


--- 第 369 页 ---

Position Analysis 361

Figure 17-3b: Positive and Negative Gamma (Curvature)

positive gamma
(a smile}

negative gamma
(a frown)

calls than short will angle up and to the right infinitely far (unlimited upside profit). The
graph of a position which is short more calls than long will angle down and to the right
infinitely far (unlimited upside risk). If the number of long and short calls are equal, or
if the position consists only of puts, the position will eventually flatten out (limited
upside risk/reward).

On the downside (extreme left tail) all calls will collapse to zero while all puts will
eventually act like short underlying contracts. The graph of a position which is long
more puts than short will angle up and to the left infinitely far (unlimited downside
profit). The graph of a position which is short more puts than long will angle down and
to the left infinitely far (unlimited downside risk). If the number of long and short puts
are equal, or if the position consists only of calls, the position will eventually flatten out
(limited downside risk/reward].

The value of a position may also change over time or as volatility conditions change.
The changes will be determined by the theta and vega associated with the position:

4. Theta (Figure 17-3c)—As time passes a positive theta position will become
more valuable, and the graph of such a position will shift upward. As time passes
a negative theta position will become less valuable, and the graph will shift
downward,

5. Vega (Figure 17-3d)—A positive vega position will be helped by increasing
volatility and hurt by declining volatility. The graph of such a position will shift


--- 第 370 页 ---

362

Chapter 17

Figure 17-3c: Positive and Negative Theta (Time Decay)

positive theta - ,
\ the graph shifts upward over time /
,

\ /

\
/ negative theta - \

the graph shifts downward over time *

Figure 17-3d: Positive and Negative Vega (Volatility)

positive (negative) vega - the graph shifts upward with higher (lower) volatility

“oN

negative (positive) vega - the graph shifts downward with higher (lower) voiatility



--- 第 371 页 ---

Position Analysis 363

upward when volatility increases and downward when volatility decreases. A
negative vega position will be hurt by increasing volatility and helped by declining
volatility. The graph of this position will shift downward when volatility increases
and upward when volatility decreases.

Note that time and volatility have similar effects on an option position. But unlike
time, which can only move in one direction, volatility can either rise or fall. If a trader
has a positive (negative) gamma position, he will necessarily have a negative (positive)
theta position. He need only worry about one or the other, either gamma or theta. But
a trader can have a positive or negative gamma position and still be concerned with
volatility. A positive gamma position can still be hurt by a rise in volatility (e.g., a short
time spread), while a negative gamma position can still be hurt by a decline in volatility
(e.g., a long time spread).

Let’s try to put these graphing principles together to analyze a position.

Stock price = 98.75; Time to June expiration = 7 weeks
Volatility = 20%; Interest rate = 6%; Dividend = 0

Option Option Option Option

Position Price Th, Val. Deita Imp. Vol.
long 20 June 105 calls 75 1.02 25 17.6
short 20 June 95 puts 1.38 112-25 22.1

short 10 stock contracts?

Even though the position is delta neutral, it does not appear to fall into any easily
recognized category. The calls appear to be underpriced and the puts appear to be
overpriced, and the position combines trades in both these options. The total theoretical
edge is:

20 x (1.02-.75) + 20 x (1.38-1.12) = +10.60

The sensitivities of the position are:

Option Gamma Theta ’ Vega
June 105 call 43 -.0270 114
June 95 puts 4.4 -.0192 115
position totals -2.0 -.1560 ~.020

First we ought to try to visualize what the graph of this position looks like. Since
the position has a positive theoretical edge of 10.60, it will cross the current stock price
of 98.75 at a point 10.60 above the zero P&L line. The position is delta neutral, so the
graph will be exactly horizontal at this point. The position is also very close to gamma
neutral at this point, so the graph will have no curvature. This means that it is bending
neither upward (concave) nor downward (convex).

2. Since the number of shares in an underlying stock contract varles from market to market, we simply
express the underlying in terms of contracts. In U.S. markets where one option contract typically
controls 100 shares of stock, this position would be short 1,000 shares.


--- 第 372 页 ---

364 Chapter 17

To complete the graph we need the upside and downside contract position. If the
market makes a large upward move, all the puts will eventually collapse to zero while
the calls will act like long underlying contracts. In our example the 20 long calls will
act like 20 long stock contracts. These will be partially offset by the actual 10 short
underlying contracts, but the total will still be an upside contract position which is long
10. If the market moves up far enough the position will take on a slope of +10. For each
point the stock price rises, the position will gain ten points in value.

If the market makes a large downward move, all the calls will eventually collapse
to zero while the puts will act like short underlying contracts. Since a short put is a long
market position, our short 20 puts will act like 20 long stock contracts. These will be
partially offset by the actual 10 short underlying contracts, but the total will still be a
downside contract position which is long 10 contracts. If the market moves down far
enough the position will take on a slope of +10. For each point the stock price falls, the
position will lose ten points in value.

The initial characteristics of our spread are shown in Figure 17-4a.

We know that the characteristics of a position are likely to change as market
conditions change. How might our position change as time passes? Since deltas move
away from 50 with the passage of time, if no movement takes place in the underlying
stock, the deltas of both the 95 put and 105 call (currently at -25 and +25) will move

Figure 17-4a: Long 20 June 105 Calls @ .75
Short 20 June 95 Puts @1.38
Short 10 Stock Contracts @98.75

40

384

yy,

304 upside contract position of +10

255

position is gamma neutral
(graph is bending neither upward nor

}
|
|
i
i
|
|
1
204 downward at current underlying price} \
|
|
|
|
f

position is delta neutral
104 T ——_- (graph is horizontal at
if
1
i
i
|

i current underlying price}
} +10.60 (theoretical edge)

theoretical profit & loss
a
L

downside contract position of +10

-10 a T T T T T —T
90 92 94 96 98 100 102 104 106 108 110
stock price



--- 第 373 页 ---

Position Analysis 365

towards zero. This means our position wil! act more and more like a position which is
naked short 10 stock contracts. Therefore, as time passes the slope of the graph is
becoming more and more negative between the exercise prices of 95 and 105 (Higure
17-4b).

What about changes in the gamma with respect to stock price movement? If the
stock price remains near the current price of 98.75, the gamma (curvature) of the
position remains near zero. As the price moves toward either the 95 or 105 exercise
price, the position takes on greater gamma characteristics as time passes. As the stock
approaches 95 the position begins to act like a short straddle (negative gamma), and as
it approaches 105 the position begins to act like a long straddle (positive gamma).

Since the gamma of our position at the current price of 98.75 is very close to zero,
we might expect the theta to also be close to zero. In this case the theta is actually
—.1560. This means the position is becoming less valuable each day. The reason is that
the sale of stock has resulted in a cash credit, a credit on which we can earn interest.
As time passes the amount of interest which we expect to earn declines, so the expected
profit also declines. This would not be the case if the underlying instrument were a
futures contract, since the sale of a futures contract does not result in a cash inflow, and
consequently no interest can be earned. The theta of such a position would therefore
be close to zero.

Figure 17-4b: Long 20 June 105 Calls @ .75
Short 20 June 95 Puts @1.38
Short 10 Stock Contracts @98.75

507

405 f

307
7 weeks to expiration

207 i ae ‘ \

va SS 2 weeks to expiration c

theoretical profit & loss
o
re

404 at expiration N ,

TT Tt T T “T —T TT
92 94 96 98 100 102 104 106 108 110
stock price


--- 第 374 页 ---

366 Chapter 17

Changes in volatility will also affect the characteristics of the position. Falling
volatility is similar to the passage of time. All deltas will move away from 50, and the
total delta position will become shorter around the current price of 98.75. If volatility
rises all deltas will move towards 50, and the total delta position will become longer.
As volatility rises (falls), the position looks more and more like a position which is naked
long (short) 10 stock contracts (Figure 17-4c).

Regardless of changes in volatility, the gamma will stay close to zero near the
midpoint price of 100. But as we move towards 95 or 105 the gamma begins to increase
as either the 95 put or 105 call becomes more and more at-the-money. At the same time
the gamma of an at-the-money option falls as volatility rises and rises as volatility falls.
The result is that in a low-volatility market any move away from 100 can cause the
gamma risk to increase very quickly, becoming negative as the stock price moves toward
95 and positive as the stock price moves toward 105.

Finally, the contract position remains the same, regardless of the passage of time or
changes in volatility. If the market makes a big move, rising far above 105 or falling far
below 95, we still have the same contract position of +10 (long 10 underlying
contracts).

This last example illustrates an important aspect of spreading. Many traders, in
addition to focusing on delta neutral strategies, will try to construct positions which are

Figure 17-4c: Long 20 June 105 Calls @ .75
Short 20 June 95 Puts @1.38
Short 10 Stock Contracts @98.75

50

volatility = 25%

volatility = 20%
304

theoretical profit & loss

volatility = 15%

-20 T T T T T T 7 T
90 92 94 96 98 100 102 104 106 108 110

stock price


--- 第 375 页 ---

Position Analysis 367

also gamma neutral or vega neutral. Such strategies may be sensible if a trader is
concerned with a move in the underlying contract, or with a change in volatility. Buta
trader should not make the assumption that if he is delta neutral, gamma neutral, and
vega neutral, there is nothing that can go wrong. Even if a position has a positive
theoretical edge and all the risk sensitivities are small, a profit is not necessarily certain.
A position is only delta neutral, or gamma neutral, or vega neutral if the theoretical
pricing model is itself correct, and if all the information which the trader has fed into
the model is also correct. If any of these assumptions are wrong, the values generated
by the theoretical pricing model are also likely to be wrong. As a result, the trader might
find that a position which initially appears to be neutral in terms of a risk sensitivity is
in fact not neutral at all.

A COMPLEX POSITION

Each of our previous examples consisted of only two different options. A more complex
position may consist of options at several different exercise prices. Consider the position
shown in Figure 17-5.

We can determine many of the characteristics of this position simply by looking at
the total sensitivities. Since the position has a positive gamma, negative theta, and
positive vega, it will initially act like a backspread. In addition, we can see that the

Figure 17-5

Stock price = 202.50; Time to June expiration = 6 weeks; Volatility = 24.0%
Interest rate = 6.00%; Dividend = 0

June Th. Imp.
Contract Position Price Value Delta Gamma Theta Vega Vol.
190 call 15.50 15.50 82 1.6 -.077 18 24.0
195 call ~23 11.63 11.80 72 2.0 -.088 23 23.3
200 call +55 8.25 8.63 61 2.3 ~.094 26 22.6
208 call —35 5.75 6.06 49 2.4 -.094 2t 22.9
210 call —-20 4.00 4.08 37 2.3 ~.086 26 23.7
215 call +41 2.63 2.63 27 2.0 ~.074 23 24.0
190 put —42 1.63 1.70 -18 1.6 ~.046 18 23.6
195 put +85 2.75 2.95 —-28 2.0 -.056 23 23.1
200 put +8 45 4.76 -39 2.3 —.062 .26 23.0
205 put -18 6.88 7.15 —51 2.4 ~.060 27 23.0
210 put 10.00 10.13 -63 2.3 -.052 26 23,5
215 put —30 13.75 13.65 -73 2.0 -.039 23 24.5
stock -18 100

Stock Calls Puts Delta Gamma _ Theta Vega P&L
totals: -18 +18 +3 -277 +50.5 ~2.244 +610 +18.82



--- 第 376 页 ---

368 Chapter 17

downside contract position is net short 21 (short 18 stock contracts, long 3 puts) while
the upside contract position is flat (short 18 stock contracts, long 18 calls). The position
has unlimited downside reward and limited upside risk/reward. Based on these
characteristics, the position can essentially be described as a put backspread. The
theoretical graph of the position under current conditions is shown by the solid line in
Figure 17-5a.

In Figure 17-5a we also see how the position will change as time passes. Because
the trader is long a large number of June 195 puts and June 200 calls, as expiration
approaches the position will act more and more like a long June 195/200 strangle.
Although the position is now slightly delta short, with the stock at its current price of
202.50, the June 200 calls will tend to dominate, causing the delta position to become
increasingly long as time passes. Should the stock drop below 195, the June 195 puts
will tend to dominate, and the delta will become increasingly short with the passage of
time. Consequently, as time passes the gamma of the position will become very large
with the stock price between 195 and 200. The total delta and gamma of the position
as time passes is shown in Figures 17-5b and 17-5c.

Figure 17-5d shows the sensitivity of the position to a change in volatility. As we
would expect, any increase in volatility will help the position and any decline in
volatility will hurt. Even if we increase or decrease volatility by 20%, to 30% or 18%,
the shape of the position remains essentially the same. While the delta and gamma will
change with changes in volatility, these numbers are not as sensitive to a change in

Figure 17-5a
300-

6 weeks to expiration (current)

\
2004 % |

3 weeks to expiration |

1005

theoretical profit & loss
o

-1007

1 week to eptaton
at expiratio 4

-2007

-300 T T T T T T T T T
180 185 190 195 200 205 210 215 220 225 230
stock price



--- 第 377 页 ---

Position Analysis 369

Figure 17-5b

8000

6000-

4000+

6 weeks to expiration (current)

delta position

at expiration!

-6000-|
|
-8000 1 1 1 —— 1 1 T T
180 185 190 195 200 205 210 215 220 225 230

stock price

Figure 17-5¢

400

1 week to expiration f
S :

3004 Ny é

3 weeks to expiration

gamma position

-100- .
6 weeks to expiration (current) sO on
-20044 TT T T T T T T T T
180 185 190 195 200 205 210 215 220 228 230

stock price



--- 第 378 页 ---

370 Chapter 17

Figure 17-5d

300
iN
. :
250-\ *
20075 \
volatility = 24%
B 150+
= volatility = 30%
°
a 1007
3
2
@
3 50
&
0+
-50-
volatility =18%
-100-7 T T T T : T T T T T
180 185 190 195 200 205 210 215 220 225 230

stock price

volatility as they are to the passage of time. The total delta and gamma of the position
as volatility changes is shown in Figures 17-5e and 17-5f.

A trader with this position must be concerned with a significant decline in volatility.
He will be especially worrted about a slow decline in the market over time. Each day
that passes is costing him 2.244 (the theta) in potential profit, and this number will
accelerate as time passes. If several weeks should pass with little movement in the stock
price, he will come under increasing pressure to reduce his theta risk. If he decides to
take some protective action, he will have to sell some options, either calls or puts. If he
considers a large move in the underlying stock a possibility, he may not want to sell calls
since this will leave him net short contracts on the upside. This will probably lead him
to sell off some of the puts which he is long, either the 195 or 200 puts.

Up to now we have not considered the risk associated with a change in interest
rates or, in the case of stock options, dividends. While these risks are usually small with
respect to the other risks, if the position is large enough we might want to consider how
a change in interest rates or dividends will impact the position.

The sale of 18 stock contracts has created a cash credit for this trader, and the
interest earned on this credit will be a part of his profit. Assuming that he is subject to
a floating interest rate, any increase in rates will help, since he will earn more on his
cash credit, and any decline in interest rates will hurt, since he will earn less on his cash
credit. We can estimate the impact on the position of a 1% change in interest rates by
calculating the interest earned to expiration at the current stock price:


--- 第 379 页 ---

Position Analysis

371

Figure 17-5e

500.

volatility =18%

-§00-

-1000-+

delta position

-150071

-20004

-2500-+

volatility = 24%

volatility = 30%

r
180 185

—
195

200

T
205210 218

stock price

7
220

OT
225

230

Figure 17-5f

1407

1205

100+

gamma position

volatility = 30%

volatility =18%

volatility = 24%

-204

T
180 185

—T
195

-
200

r
205 216

stock price

210

220228

230



--- 第 380 页 ---

372 Chapter 17

1% x 42/365 x 202.50 = .233

Since the trader is short 18 stock contracts, the total impact of a 1% change in interest
tates is:

233 x 18 = 4.19

For each percentage point increase in interest rates, his position will increase in value
by approximately 4.19; for each percentage point decline in interest rates, his position
will decline in value by approximately 4.19. If interest rates were to immediately drop
from 6% to 4%, the position’s potential profit would drop by approximately 8.38.

The underlying stock for this position currently pays no dividend, but the trader
may want to consider the possibility that the company will decide to start paying a
dividend. If the company decides to pay a dividend prior to June expiration, the trader,
as a borrower of stock, will be required to pay this dividend amount to the stock lender.
Since he is short 18 stock contracts, for each point increase in the dividend, the trader
will lose 18 times the dividend in potential profit. If the company decides to pay a
dividend of 2.00, the trader’s position will be reduced in value by approximately 36.00.

If the trader believes that the company might in fact decide to pay a dividend prior
to June expiration, or if he feels that interest rates could fall significantly, he will want
to take some action to reduce his risk. Since the risk results from the short stock position,
he can eliminate most of his risk by eliminating the 18 short stock contracts. Assuming
that the trader wants to maintain the same delta position, he can accomplish this by
buying back the short stock and replacing it with either deeply in-the-money options
(buy deeply in-the-money puts or sell deeply in-the-money calls), or by selling synthetic
stock contracts (sell calls and buy puts at the same exercise price). The former strategy
would be the same as executing a three-way; the latter strategy would be the same as
executing a conversion.

The sensitivity of the position to a change in interest rates and dividends is shown
in Figures 17-5g and 17-5h.

FUTURES OPTION POSITIONS

The foregoing positions have all consisted of stock options, but delta, gamma, and vega
characteristics are similar whether a trader is dealing with stock or futures options.
Except for the effect of interest rates and dividends, the analyses of the positions would
be essentially the same for futures options. While futures options are not subject to
dividend considerations, nor are they as sensitive to changes in interest rates as stock
options, there is an additional dimension to the analysis of a futures option position
because the relationship between futures months is often less well defined than with
stock options. For example, consider the position in Figure 17-6.

This is typical of the type of position an active trader often ends up with: a seemingly
disjointed collection of options and underlying contracts which cannot be easily
categorized. Nonetheless, it is important that the trader recognize the risks which the
position currently presents, as well as those risks which might arise if conditions change.


--- 第 381 页 ---

Position Analysis

373

Figure 17-5g

350

300~+

250:

200-|

1505

theoretical profit & loss

100-5

i
i
i
i

| interest rate = 12%

interest rate = 9%

interest rate = 6% (current)

interest rate = 3%

T
185

T T t
205 210 215

stock price

T
220

r
225

230

Figure 17-5h

300

2005

15074

100-4

505

theoretical profit & loss

dividend = 0 (current)

dividend = 2.00

-507

dividend = 4.00

-100

—-
180 185

180

T T
195 200

T r T
205 210 215

stock price

220

230



--- 第 382 页 ---

Chapter 17

374

9S6~
vc6-
L98-
8 pl-
g6g—-
Ss by-
Lge-
Ov
AT

ee
OL
vel
9'bz
Or
Lis
GEL
698
£26
eyed

patiduy

66'S
gist
28°41
6s'¥h
orvh
vobl
ey
92°Sh
soot

ors
SVSh
oL'¢h
o'r
esl
govl
bO'Sh
zest
£091
AUIREICA
peyiduy

O10 FlLOo'—
0z0" ZE00°—
PEO" g900°—
60° 1OlO-
650 $c 10"—
650° 92 10°—
6P0' solo
e£0° 1200°—
810 6£00°—
O10’ @z00'—
ozo" £r00"—
PEO" 7200°—
6h0' -010'—
650° g2lo—
690’ 92 10—
670" £0 10'—
€60° 2900°-
Slo €£00°—
eben Byeul

%00'9 = ISO19}U|

So
zg
96
GEL
sob
OLl
el
s6
Vg

Bec
2g
96

BEL

sol

OLI
byt
S68

Mg

euUWeD

O00!

s'96-
Lee-
gse-
Sbl-
o'eg-
6 bp-
6'S2—-
VEl~
ag-

6c

89
seh
age
Por
g2g
Gee
898
S'e6
eyed

2%0°9b = AUIDEIOA

09°b
9S
vLe
ee'l
beh

€0°
20°
or
ve"
99°
rd
gf't
ssc
Pre

enleA
feapesooyy

{syaem g = UOVeuIdXe of OUI,

Lor
g9°E
pL?
16h
beh
OL
ge"
ra
80°

£0
20°
gk
ce”
co
ort
92h
9s"
Ore
ahd

get

byt
vhi-

og-
sh-
gel-
9S t+
9e+
6e-

8e-
UOoNIsod

semn}

ind 9g
qnd
ynd 2g
ynd 1g
ind og
ind 6
ind gp
ind zp
ind gb

Ie9 pg
Heo eg
es 2
eo 1S
29 0S
I29 6p
e9 ey
Wo 27
Heo ob
yoeyquoa

‘Ov’ 6p = Saininy Ae,

9-Z} eanBi4



--- 第 383 页 ---

375

Position Analysts

eebet
L£9el-
bpspt
eyed
poyduyy

ees

OLZ-
o6o-
96s-
as) a
O'6e—
e6e-
Ole
Srl-

gg}
912
g'6z
6'8e
Z6p
6S
69
GLL
obs
eyed

payiduy

6802+
pe dy+
ps'e+
Td
feonaioayl

02'S
LOS}
00'S}
20'S}
gOS}
LVSh
Best
got
66°S1

pest
Aa
86'h I
50°51}
60'S}
02's}
Ses]
09'S}
pe'sh

Aunelon,

payiduy]

6867+

9PE0e+

Zg¢°g-
ehaa

290°
$20
280°
560°
860°
560°
980°
220°
250°

290°
$20°
280°
S60"
860°
S60"
980°
240°
250°
ehep

‘Buipunol 0} enp Ajoexe wins jou APU S|P}O] .

eg e9est o'ese- 9r- 1s+ 2e- »SUUOW IV
SbSLI- s'zsoe+ s'se9- 801+ QEL+ 9+ Ane
gO%h + 2925 I- S2eet+ vSh— ge- 82- Ae
eyouL ewes eyed snd seo soinnd sjejo,
ooo} ot sonny
Zp00"- 29 6 }8- ebb sey Sit nd ¢g
o3900— OL gSl- AS Sse oe ind eg
2200- 88 Lig ees 622% be ynd 2g
0s00— 96 8'8s- 1% ab] ger qnd 1g
€800— 66 Z6r- rot sg} Bt ynd og
+800"— 96 €'6e- duh 60'} pLh+ qnd 6b
Z00- £8 6'62- 6L bd’ 99- ind gb
€900— SL Gl2- 1s sb ind Lp
6r00- “Zs co oe 1S Le" ind op
ps00— z9 9'9L ve’. 08" LLL+ 9 pS
$900 92 oes as Sr Sb 189 £S
$200 88 8':0€ 92 29° 06 wo 2s
z800— 96 Lee B0'L 66° Se- eo 1S
ps0o— 66 eer 6F't ov} 20 OS
o800"— 96 26g 107 €6'} Wo 6
+ Z00— £8 9°89 z's 9s'2 Si+ 10 gb
8g00"— el OLL . ee - 67 eo Lb
epoo- Zs ove Oly Oy (189 ob
eyous eulweg eyed anrea 301d uo}y|sod yoRuyuog
[edyjes004

%00'9 = ISHa}U]

‘40°91 = ANINBION, —-s‘SaeM EL = UOQRIAXS 0} eLUL)

‘S8'6b = Sain}ny Ajne


--- 第 384 页 ---

376 Chapter 17

Since we are analyzing a position which includes two different futures months, we
will have to make some assumptions about the relationship between the two futures
contracts. The simplest relationship is based on a constant cost of carry. The current
spread of .45 (49.85 - 49.40) between the May and July futures months is based on
this relationship, since:

56/365 x 6% x 49.40 = .45

If the spread were based only on cost of carry, and interest rates remained constant at
6%, July futures would always be .92% (56/365 x 6%) greater than May futures.
Unfortunately, many markets, particularly in energy and agricultural products, are
subject to supply and demand forces which often distort the cost of carry relationship
between futures months. For this reason, traders often choose to assume a fixed spread
relationship when analyzing option positions in several different futures months. In our
example, we will make the assumption that the spread between May and July futures
is always .45.

We have also added the assumption that July futures will be slightly more volatile
(16%) than May futures (15%). Even though these volatility assumptions seem to be
slightly higher than the implied volatilities in the marketplace, the trader’s volatility
relationship between May and July is consistent with the marketplace’s opinion where
the July implied volatility seems to be slightly higher than the May implied volatility.

Figures 17-6a through 17-6f show the current characteristics of the position, as well
as the characteristics under different time and volatility assumptions. At the current
underlying price (May futures = 49.40, July futures = 49.85), the passage of time or any
decline in volatility will hurt the position (negative theta, positive vega). But if the
underlying market should either decline or rise several points, the passage of time will
begin to help the position (Figure 17-6a). Even though the theta may become positive
with a move of several points, the vega of this position always remains positive (Figure
17-6b). Regardless of underlying price, any increase (decline) in volatility will help (hurt)
the position. The position acts like a long straddle with the underlying close to 50, but
it acts like a long time spread with the underlying close to 46 or 53. This is typical of
how difficult it can sometimes be to classify complex positions. If the position is large
enough, even small changes in market conditions can cause the position to change its
characteristics radically.

Note that if one were to look only at the delta and gamma, it might seem that the
best thing which could happen to this trader would be a swift decline in the underlying
market {negative delta, positive gamma). If, however, the decline is too violent, with
the market falling five or six points, the trader will have to consider his net contract
position. All calls will collapse to zero, but the net total of 46 puts which he is short will
begin to act like long futures. These will be partially offset by the 22 futures which he
is actually short. But the result will be a position which is net long 24 contracts, leaving
the trader with unlimited downside risk. Of course, a violent upside move will never
be a problem since the trader has an upside contract position which is net long 29
contracts (long 51 calls, short 22 futures).


--- 第 385 页 ---

Position Analysis 377

Figure 17-6a

200-—

150-4

5 weeks to May expiration (current)

at May expiration

1005
i
8
=
5
a
B
s
BO
Oo
a
&
505

40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
May futures price

Figure 17-6b

200

180" current volatility

volatility increases 25% (May= 15%, July=16%)
(May= 18.75%, July=20%) .

theoretical profit & loss

volatility declines 25%
(May=1 1.25%, July=12%)

T T T T

150+ TT T T T
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60

May tutures price



--- 第 386 页 ---

378 Chapter 17

Figure 17-6c

150

at May expiration

100-1 }

delta position (hundreds)

4 2 weeks to May expiration

t00+ T T T T T T T T T
4 42 44 46 48 50 52 64 56 58 60
May futures price
Figure 17-6d

current volatility
(May= 15%, July=16%)

delta position (hundreds)

-t07

volatility increases 25%
(May=18,75%, July=20%)

-20-1 volatility declines 25%

(May=1t.25%, July=12%) \
-304—- T T 7 T T 1 1 : _
40 42 44 46 48 60 52 84 56 58 60

May futures price



--- 第 387 页 ---

Position Analysis 379

Figure 17-6e
50
ft
40- fa
30+ i
5 weeks to May expiration (current)
z 1
2
no]
c
=]
£
Cc
ie]
=
oO
a
o
£
E
oO
a
-304 ;
a 1 week to May expiration
° |
-40-+-——_—__-—_—— T T t$—r T T T TT
40 42 44 46 48 50 $2 4 56 68 60
May futures price
Figure 17-6f
20
H n current volatility
i : (May= 15%, July=16%)
154 i ‘
105 a / :
volatility increases 25% } .
(May= 8.75%, July=20%) y +
3 !
Gg 8&4 .
ao]
Cc
3
£
i=}
o
B= -
= .
ie]
Q f
i] . f
€ \
€ x.
3
oO
464 ‘ : volatility declines 25%
\ a (May= 11.25%, July= 12%)
-20 ms T im rs ae 7 T T
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60

May futures price



--- 第 388 页 ---

380 Chapter 17

Figure 17-6 also gives the implied delta for the individual options as well as for the
total position. This can sometimes be a useful number because a trader may want to
take into consideration current market conditions when deciding how to hedge his
position. In this example there is little difference between the trader’s presumed delta
position (-253) and his implied delta position (-242]. But this is not always the case. If
the trader’s volatility assumption is dramatically different than the implied volatility in
the marketplace, the presumed delta position might be significantly different than the
implied delta position. Since no one can be sure what the right volatility is, no trader
can be sure that his delta calculations are correct. Given this uncertainty, it is not
uncommon among traders to hedge a position somewhere between the trader’s own
delta and the implied delta. If, for example, a trader calculated his delta position as
+600, but found that the implied delta was +200, he might treat the position as if it had
a delta of +400. If he wanted to get delta neutral, the trader might sell four underlying
contracts.

We made the assumption that the spread between the July and May futures
contracts will remain constant at .45. What will happen if the spread begins to widen
or narrow? The total delta of -252 indicates that the trader would like a decline in the
market. With a July delta of -635 and a May delta of +382, the trader would prefer July
to go down faster than May. The ideal would be for July futures to decline and at the
same time for May futures to rise, but any narrowing of the Juty/May spread should
help the position. In futures equivalents, we might describe the position as being roughly
short three July/May futures spreads, and short an additional! 214 July futures.

Finally, we might want to analyze a total position which consists of contracts which
are not directly related, but which have somewhat similar characteristics. For example,
suppose we have the ratio vertical call spread presented at the beginning of this chapter:

ABC stock price = 99.00; — Time to June expiration = 7 weeks
Volatility= 20%; Interestrate=6%; Dividend =0

Option Option Option Option

Position Price Th. Val. Delta’ Imp. Vol.
long 10 June 95 calls 6.25 5.82 76 23.7
short 30 June 105 calls 1.63 1.08 26 24.5

At the same time, suppose we also have a long strangle in a different stock:

XYZ stock price = 62.00; — Time to July expiration = 11 weeks
Volatility = 23%; Interest rate = 6%; Dividend = .50 in 8 weeks

Option Option Option Option

Position Price Th. Val. Delta Imp. Vol.
long 20 July 65 calls 1.38 1.52 36 21.6
long 20 July 60 puts 1.50 1.57 ~34 22.3

If we combine these two positions, how might we analyze the overall risk? One
possible method might be to look at the change in value of the two positions per point
move in the underlying stocks. But because the two stocks are trading at different prices,


--- 第 389 页 ---

Position Analysis 38!

and because they are expected to have different volatilities, a one-point move in ABC is
unlikely to be matched by a one-point move in XYZ. To equate movement in ABC with
movement in XYZ, it may be more useful! to look at price changes in terms of standard
deviations. For example, we can approximate a weekly standard deviation for each
stock by dividing the annual volatility by ¥52, and multiplying this by the stock price:

ABC: 20%/7.2 x 99 = 2.75
XYZ: 23%/7.2 x 62 = 1.98

From these numbers we can generate graphs showing the position value given various
standard deviation price changes in each underlying stock. This has been done in Figure
17-7a. Since we have a ratio vertical spread in ABC stock options and a long strangle in
XYZ stock options, it should come as no surprise that the position will show its
maximum theoretical profit when ABC sits still and XYZ makes a big move.

In order to complete our analysis we might want to look at the delta, gamma, theta,
and vega of the position. But, again, with the stocks at different prices it may be difficult
to equate the sensitivities of the ABC options with the sensitivities of the XYZ options.
Since our total position is an intermarket spread, rather than looking at the delta,
gamma, theta, and vega of the position, we might instead look at the $delta, $gamma,
Stheta, and $vega sensitivities introduced in Chapter 16. These sensitivities are shown
in Figures 17-7b through 17-7e.°

Figure 17-7a
100 7
XYZ moves down 4 XYZ moves up
4st. devs. 4 st, devs.
604 xyz moves up
2 st. devs.
{
2 404 4
ie) Le
pel TTT oe
= _ ~~
2 oo} ——— ae SK
a ~~ ce ee a SN
a << -
3 aN
= -204 ON
XYZ moves down a NN
2 st. devs. . aN
. 4 “ . ae
40 XYZ doesn’t move ~ ONS
-604
-80-- T T T t T T T
4 3 -2 4 0 1 2 3 4

ABC Price Movement (st. devs.)

3. In Figures 17-7b through 17-7e we make the assumption that each point is worth $100.


--- 第 390 页 ---

382 Chapter 17
Figure 17-7b
1500 r
XYZ moves up
4st. devs.
10005
Ee}
“00 XYZ moves up
ate _ 2 st. devs.
< ~ ae NN
2 oF
= ; S.
é ee el .
£ 500+ + ~ NN
8 ~
a NN
gs —
e£ -1000-4 .
XYZ moves down -
-1600- 481. devs. XYZ moves down . .
2 st. devs. a
XYZ doesn’t move
-200075
-2500 ——__—___— { — , —
4 -3 -2 a fv) 1 2 3 4
ABC Price Movement (st. devs.)
Figure 17-7c
200 ;
{
i
150-4
< 1004 _— XYZ doesn’t move
2 ws
=
)
a
=
= 504 XYZ moves
& up or down
br 2 st. devs.
g
Oo At ON
Lal 0
XYZ moves
up of down
-505 4 st. devs.
-100+ ——T T an ——- ; |
-4 3 2 -1 Le) 1 2 3 4

ABC Price Movement (st. devs.)



--- 第 391 页 ---

Position Analysis

383

Figure 17-7d

100:

4044

2075

XYZ moves down
4st, devs.

XYZ moves down
2 st. devs.

XYZ moves up
4, st. devs.

Total $Theta Position

XYZ doesn’t move

XYZ moves up
2. st. devs.

; = — +
2 4 0 1

ABC Price Movement (st. devs.)

no
w
a

4004-2

200-)

1007 2st. devs.

XYZ moves down

XYZ moves up
2. st, devs.

XYZ doesn't move

Tota! $Vega Pesition

-100>

XYZ moves down
Ast. devs.

XYZ moves up
4. st. devs.

T

2 4 0 1 2 3
ABC Price Movement (st. devs.)

at



--- 第 392 页 ---

384 Chapter 17

It may initially be difficult to grasp why the $gamma, $vega, and $theta are
changing as they are. If one recalls that the gamma, theta, and vega are always greatest
for an at-the-money option, the position should show its greatest positive $gamma,
negative $theta, and positive $vega when ABC is close to 95 (the position is long ABC
95 calis) and when XYZ is close to either 60 or 65 (the position is long XYZ 60 puts and
XYZ 65 calls). The position should show its greatest negative $gamma, positive $theta,
and negative $vega when ABC is close to 105 (the position is short ABC 105 calls) and
the when XYZ is as far away from 60 and 65 as possible. Since price movement in
Figures 17-7a through 17-7e is expressed in standard deviations, in order to interpret
the graphs we need to know where the exercise prices are in terms of standard
deviations. With ABC at 99 and a one standard deviation price change of 2.75, the ABC
exercise prices in terms of standard deviations are:

95 call: (95- 99} 72.75 =-1.5 st. devs.
105 call: (105 -— 99) / 2.75 = +2.2 st. devs.

With XYZ at 62 and a one standard deviation price change of 1.98, the XYZ exercise
prices in terms of standard deviations are:

60 put: (60-62) / 1.98 =-1 st. dev.
65 call: (65-62) / 1.98 = +1.5 st. devs.

With these values in mind, the reader should take some time to study the graphs and
confirm that the $delta, $gamma, $theta, and $vega of the position are in fact consistent
with the principles of option evaluation.

The foregoing example consisted of positions in only two different underlying
markets. If a trader had option positions in several different underlying markets, a
detailed analysis of the total position would require multidimensional graphs. Even if
they could be constructed, such graphs would be too complex for most traders to
interpret. Under such circumstances the only practical solution is to separate positions
by the underlying instrument and do an individual analysis of each market.


--- 第 393 页 ---

So 18 Seo

Models and the Real World

The accuracy of values generated by a theoretical pricing model rests on two points: the
accuracy of the assumptions upon which the model is based, and the accuracy of the
inputs into the model. Thus far, we have tended to focus on the second area, the
accuracy of the inputs. Through attention to the sensitivities of an option position (delta,
gamma, theta, vega, and rho), a trader can identify those inputs which represent the
greatest risk to his position, and thereby prepare to take protective action if things go
wrong. While all the inputs into the model representa risk to the trader, we have placed
special emphasis on volatility, since it is the one input which cannot be directly observed
in the marketplace.

However, the active option trader cannot afford to ignore the first area, the
possibility that the assumptions which form the foundation of the model are themselves
inaccurate or unrealistic. Some of these assumptions pertain to the way business is
transacted in the marketplace, while others pertain to the mathematics of option pricing.

To begin, we might list the most important assumptions built into a traditional
pricing model!

1. Markets are frictionless
a. The underlying contract can be freely bought or sold, without restriction
b. There are no tax consequences associated with trading

c. Everyone can borrow and lend money freely, and one interest rate applies
to all transactions

d. There are no transaction casts
2. Interest rates are constant over the life of an option
3. Volatility is constant over the life of an option

4. Trading is continuous with no gaps in the price changes of an underlying
instrument

5. Volatility is independent of the price of the underlying contract

6. Over short periods of time the percent price changes in an underlying contract
are normally distributed, resulting in a lognormal distribution of underlying
prices at expiration

1. By “traditional pricing model” we mean those that are mast commonly used: the Black-Scholes model
and {ts variations, the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, or the Whaley model.

385


--- 第 394 页 ---

386 Chapter 18

The reader may already have an opinion about the accuracy of these assumptions, but
let’s consider them one by one.

MARKETS ARE FRICTIONLESS

In Chapter 5 we came to the obvious conclusion that markets are not frictionless, The
underlying contract cannot always be freely bought or sold; there are sometimes tax
consequences; a trader cannot always borrow and lend money freely, nor at the same
rate; there are always transaction costs.

In the futures markets the underlying cannot always be freely bought or sold
because exchanges sometimes set daily price limits beyond which a futures contract
may not trade. When that limit is reached, trading is halted until the market comes off
its limit. If it doesn’t come off limit, trading does not resume until the next business day.

The consequences of a locked futures market are usually not severe, and there are
several ways for a trader to circumvent the problem. Instead of trading in the futures
market, a trader might be able to trade in the cash market. Or the trader might be able
to trade the underlying market by trading a futures spread where one side of the spread
is not locked. For example, suppose a trader wants to buy a June futures contract which
is up limit. If a March futures contract is still trading because it is not up its limit, the
trader can buy a June/March spread (buy June, sell March], and then go back into the
market and buy the March futures contract. This leaves him long a June futures
contract, which is what he wanted. Finally, if the underlying futures market is locked,
but the option market is not locked, a trader can trade synthetic long or short futures
contracts.

In the stock market, there may be prohibitions against the sale of stock not actually
owned. Or if short sales are allowed, there may be restrictions on when such sales can
be made. Ifa trader cannot freely sell stock, put prices become inflated compared to call
prices, and all the conversions and reversals appear to be mispriced with respect to their
theoretical values. If short sales are not freely permitted, many stock option traders try
to carry some long stock so they will always be in a position to sell stock if the need
arises. Also, we saw in Chapter 5 in the discussion of time spreads, and in Chapter 12
in the discussion of boxes, that tender offers for a stock can distort the value of these
positions. In the case of time spreads, traders may be forced to exercise call options with
some time value remaining because no stock can be borrowed to carry a short position.
A box may be trading at greater than its theoretical value if a partial tender offer ts made
and early exercise is a possibility.

While there are occasionally tax considerations, for most market participants these
are usually minor. When considering a strategy, a trader is unlikely to ask himself, “If
this trade makes or loses money, what will be the tax consequences?” Nor should most
traders ask such a question. Differences in tax consequences, or changing tax conse-
quences, rarely make one strategy better than another.?

2.  Thisis not to say that tax consequences are always insignificant. Tax considerations can sometimes play
a role in portfolio management. They can also play arole in stock option strategies involving dividends,
when the dividends are subject to different tax rules than the gains or tosses from stock or options.


--- 第 395 页 ---

Models and the Real World 387

The assumption that a trader can always borrow or lend money freely is a more
serious weakness in pricing models. Even if a trader has sufficient funds to initiate a
trade, he may find at some later date that he is required to come up with additional
funds in the form of increased margin requirements.3 If money were freely available
margin would never be a problem. A trader could always borrow margin money and
deposit the money with the clearing house. Since the borrowing and lending rate are
assumed to be the same, and since the clearing house in theory pays interest on the
margin deposit, there would never be a problem obtaining margin money, nor would
there ever be a cost associated it.

In the real world traders do not have unlimited borrowing capacity. If a trader
cannot meet a margin requirement he may be forced to liquidate a position prior to
expiration. Since all models, even those which allow for early exercise, assume that a
trader will always have the choice of holding a position to expiration, the inability to
meet margin requirements, and therefore maintain the position, can make the values
generated by the theoretical pricing model less reliable. Experienced traders learn to
consider the risk of a position not only from the standpoint of how much the position
might lose if things go wrong, but how much margin might be required to maintain the
position over the life of the options. A trader should always have sufficient margin
money available to meet this latter requirement.

Even if a trader had unlimited borrowing capacity, the fact that for most traders
borrowing and lending rates are not the same can also cause problems with strategies
based on model generated values. A trader who borrows margin money at one rate will
almost certainly receive a lower rate when he deposits this money with the clearing
house. The difference between these rates, which will result in a loss to the trader, is
something of which the model is unaware. And the greater the difference between
borrowing and lending rates, the less reliable will be the values generated by the model.

The most serious flaw in the frictionless markets hypothesis is the assumption that
there are no transaction costs. While a strategy might or might not be affected by tax or
interest rate considerations, there are always transaction costs. These costs can come in
the form of brokerage fees, clearing fees, or an exchange membership. For many market
participants, transaction costs may be so great that a strategy which looks sensible based
on model-generated values may not be worth doing when transaction costs are also
taken into consideration. Moreover, transaction costs can accrue not only when the
strategy is initiated or liquidated, but also every time an adjustment is made. Ifa strategy
will require many adjustments because it has a high gamma and the trader intends to
Stay delta neutral, the transaction costs can have an especially great impact on model-
generated values.

3. The possibility that a trader in a futures option market may also have to come up with additional
varlation money, as opposed to margin money, subsequent to establishing an option position Is
Incorporated into most models. This is why a conversion or reversal in a futures option market may not
be delta neutral.


--- 第 396 页 ---

388 Chapter 18

INTEREST RATES ARE CONSTANT
OVER THE LIFE OF AN OPTION

The interest rate component assumed in a theoretical pricing model is the riskless rate
over the life of an option. Any credits or debits associated with an option strategy will
be subject to an interest rate identical to the least risky rate corresponding to the term
of the option. In most markets the least risky rate is the rate associated with government
issued securities. A trader in a U.S. option market who sells straddles consisting of
three-month calls and puts is assumed by the model to have invested the resulting credit
in three-month government treasury bills. If both the option position and the treasury
bills are held to expiration, this effectively locks in one interest rate (that associated with
three-month treasury bills) over the life of the options.

In reality few traders actually take the proceeds from an option trade and invest it
in government securities. More often, a trader will put the proceeds in a trading
account, where it is subject to a variable interest rate. Moreover, while a trader can lend
money to the government by purchasing government securities, he cannot do the
reverse and borrow money from the government at the same rate. If he wants to borrow,
he may have to go to a bank where the cost of borrowing could be subject to a variable
interest rate. Given the realities of the marketplace, most traders’ transactions are not
subject to a fixed and riskless rate, as the model assumes, but to a constantly changing
interest rate. Is this a cause for worry?

While a changing interest rate will cause the value of a trader’s option position to
change, interest rates usually do not change in a way which will have a significant
impact on an option’s value, at least in the short run. Since the effect of changing interest
rates is a function of time to expiration, and since most listed options have terms of less
than nine months, interest rates would have to change violently to have an impact on
any but the most deeply in-the-money options. Changing interest rates become even less
ofa concern when one considers how much more sensitive option values are to changes
in the price of the underlying instrument or to changes in volatility.

This is not to say that a trader should completely ignore the possibility of changing
interest rates. As we saw in Chapter 8, changing interest rates can have an impact on
time spreads in the stock option market. But even then, interest rates would have to
change several percentage points over a short period of time to have a significant impact
(see Figure 8-15).

With the introduction of long-term equity options, known as LEAPS, the conse-
quences of changing interest rates may well become more of a concern. Using the
Black-Scholes model, we can see in Figure 18-1 that the values of two-year stock options
changes significantly with only small changes in interest rates (delta values are in
parentheses). Note particularly how quickly the 120 put drops below its parity value of
20.00. In a high interest rate environment, a long-term in-the-money American put will
quickly become an early exercise candidate. Everyone will prefer to exercise the put in
order to earn a high rate of interest on the proceeds from the sale of the stock.


--- 第 397 页 ---

389

(Le-) o2'9
(69) 00°91
(€1-) 80'%
(28) 0S'92
(e-) e¢°
(26) £8°6e
Spl

Models and the Real Worid

(9e-) se"8
(p9) 96°e1
(91-) sz’
(be) 60'be
(p-) ib
(96) pS'ze
Eb

(Zp-) 6201
(8S) SO'ZL
(oz-) 69°
(08) 2212
(-) 49°
(s6) Z1'Se
%OL

(8b-) bS'c
(Z$) 8z’oL

(bz-) £9"
(92) Zb'6L
(L-) 6"
(€6) 22°2e
%B

O = puepiniq

(eg-) OFS
(Zy) 00°6

(62-) 68°S
(LZ) O@'ZE
{6-) 62't
(16) ve"08
%9

‘Oe = Aner

(65-) 00°81 (p9-) babe
(bb) ZL (98) $6"

(pe-) 68°Z (6€-) 216
(99) 80°SE (19) OL'eE

(LI) SLE (pL-) pe?
(68) 06°22 (98) ep'sz
eb %z

‘sree Z = uorendxe 0} owt!

ind oz

(9 OZ

ind oor

19 OOF

nd og

1re9 08

s@]ey }Ses8] Uy]

‘00} = oud yOo}S
i-eb eunBi4


--- 第 398 页 ---

390 Chapter 18

VOLATILITY IS CONSTANT
OVER THE LIFE OF THE OPTION

When a trader feeds a volatility into a theoretical pricing model, he is telling the model
the magnitude of price changes which will occur over the life of the option. Given the
characteristics of a normal distribution, the model uses the volatility to extrapolate a
certain number of one, two, three, or more standard deviation price changes. Moreover,
the model assumes that occurrences of each particular magnitude will be evenly
distributed over the life of the option. Two standard deviation price changes will be
evenly distributed among the one standard deviation price changes; three standard
deviation price changes will be evenly distributed among the one and two standard
deviation price changes; and so on.

Look at Figures 18-2a and 18-2b, daily bar charts of an underlying contract over
the life of a certain option. Both bar charts exhibit exactly the same volatility over the
period in question, 16.7%. Yet it is obvious that the order in which the volatility occurs
is completely different. In Figure 18-2a all the large price changes occur during the early
part of the option’s life, while in Figure 18-2b all the large price changes occur during
the latter part of the option’s life. This is often how price changes actually occur in the
real world, rather than the even distribution which the model assumes. A trader
typically encounters periods of high volatility where all the two and three standard
deviation price changes seem to be bunched together. Or he encounters periods of low
volatility where all the one standard deviation price changes seem to be bunched
together. A graph of historical volatility is never a straight line. (For a good example of
this, the reader should look again at Figure 14-2.) But the theoretical pricing model
cannot differentiate between our two volatility scenarios. The model simply sees a
volatility of 16.7% and assumes that all price changes are evenly distributed, and
consistent with this volatility, over the life of the option.

Suppose a trader were to buy a 105 straddle and assumed, correctly, a volatility of
16.7%. If he bought and sold underlying contracts in order to remain delta neutral over
the life of the option, the model tells him, because it assumes a constant volatility of
16.7%, that the profit or loss to the trader will be identical in either of our scenarios. Is
this likely to be the case?

Notice that the underlying market is moving through 105 both at the beginning
and at the end of the options’ life. We can therefore consider the 105 call and put as
being at-the-money during these periods. Since at-the-money options have the highest
gamma, the 105 straddle will be a relatively high gamma position both early and late in
the spread’s life, Short-term at-the-money options always have greater gammas than
long-term at-the-money options, so any increase in volatility which occurs during the
latter part of the option’s life, as it does in Figure 18-2b, will have a much greater impact
on the position than volatility which occurs during the early part of the option’s life, as
it does in Figure 18-2a.

Because the gamma of a position determines both the magnitude and frequency of
the adjustment process, the 105 straddle will be much more valuable under the
movement represented in Figure 18-2b. The movement back and forth through the


--- 第 399 页 ---

Models and the Real World

391

115

Figure 18-2a

110

95


--- 第 400 页 ---

+ OOL

SOL
r

LOE

StL
qz-8t aunbiy

392



--- 第 401 页 ---

Models and the Real World 393

exercise price late in the option’s life will require larger and larger adjustments, each of
which is favorable to the holder of the 105 straddle. The scenario in Figure 18-2a will
also require adjustments. But the adjustments now will be relatively small because the
movement in the underlying contract is much less dramatic.

Through experience most traders have come to the conclusion that the order in
which volatility occurs does matter. It matters especially for at-the-money options,
because they have the greatest gammas. Any period of high volatility which occurs near
expiration will have a greater impact on an at-the-money option than the same high
volatility which occurs when the option has a great deal of time remaining to expiration.
Consequently, even if one knows the actual volatility over the life of an option, a model
will tend to undervalue at-the-money options in a rising volatility market, and overvalue
at-the-money options in a falling volatility market.

We have only considered one alternative volatility scenario, where volatility is
either increasing or decreasing. But there are an infinite number of paths which volatility
might follow over the life of an option. A trader might even assume that volatility is itself
random, and that predicting volatility with any degree of accuracy is not possible.
Models which assume stochastic volatility do exist and might, under some conditions,
be more suitable than a traditional pricing model. At the same time, such models add
another dimension of complexity to a trader’s life, and for this reason are not widely
used.

Some contracts, by their very nature, are known to change their volatility charac-
teristics over time. Interest rate products, in particular, fall into this category. As a bond
approaches maturity, the price of the bond moves inexorably towards par. At maturity,
regardless of interest rates, the bond will have a fixed and known value. Clearly, one
cannot assume that the price of the bond follows a random walk through time. Even if
one assumes that interest rates move randomly, and that the volatility of interest rates
is constant, interest rate instruments will change their volatility over time because
instruments of different maturities have different sensitivities to changes in interest
rates. If we take into consideration the fact that interest rates also vary for different
maturities, a traditional Black-Scholes type model is obviously inadequate for the
evaluation of such products. This has led to the development of special models to
evaluate interest rate instruments.>

4. For amore detailed discussion see:
Hull, John and White, Alan, “The Pricing of Options with Stochastic Volatilities,” Journal of Finance,
Vol. 42, No. 2, June 1987, pages 281-300,
Scott, Louis D., “Option Pricing when Variance Changes Randomly: Theory, Estimation, and Application,”
Journal of Finance and Quantitative Analysis, No. 22, December 1987, pages 419-438,
Wiggins, J.B., “Option Values under Stochastic Volatility: Theory and Empirical Results,” Journal of
Financial Economics, No. 19, December 1987, pages 351-372.

5. See for example:
Ho, Thomas, T.S.Y. and Lee, Sang-Bin, “Term Structure Movements and the Pricing of Interest Rate
Contingent Claims,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 41, No. 5, December 1986, pages 1011-1029.
Heath, David; Jarrow, Robert; and Morton, Andrew, “Bond Pricing and the Term Structure of Interest
Rates: A New Methodology,” Econometrica, Vol. 60, 1992, pages 77-105.


--- 第 402 页 ---

394 Chapter 18

TRADING IS CONTINUOUS

A theoretician trying to develop a realistic price distribution for use in a theoretical
pricing model might first ask how the prices of an underlying contract change over time.
Perhaps not all contracts change prices in the same way. Price changes might, for
example, follow a diffusion process {see Figure 18-3). In a diffusion process there are
smooth and continuous changes from one price to the next, with no gaps between
consecutive prices. Moreover, the longer the period of time between price readings, the
greater the dispersion in prices. An example of a typical diffusion process might be the
temperature readings in a specific location. While the temperature can change very
quickly, there will never be any gaps. If the temperature at one moment is 15° but ata
later time is 18°, then at some intermediate time, even if only very briefly, the
temperature must have also been 16° and 17°. And there is likely to be a greater
temperature change over six weeks than over six days.

Prices might also follow a jump process. In a strict jump process, the price of a
contract remains constant for a period of time, then instantaneously jumps to a new
price, where it again remains constant for some period of time. The way in which central
banks set interest rates is typical of a jump process. In the United States, when the
Federal Reserve sets the discount rate, it remains there until it is fixed at a new rate. It
remains at this new rate until the Federal Reserve again announces a change in the
discount rate. A jump process is a combination of fixed prices and instantaneous jumps.

Most theoretical pricing models assume that trading in the underlying contract
follows a diffusion process. Trading is assumed to be continuous, proceeding 24 hours
per day, seven days per week, without interruption. There can be no gaps in the price
of the underlying contract. If a contract trades at 46.05, and at some later time trades
at 46.08, then at some intermediate time it must have also traded, even if only briefly,
at 46.06 and 46.07. If one were to draw a graph of price changes under a diffusion
process, one would never lift the pencil from the paper.

A diffusion process is a convenient, but clearly inexact, approximation of how
prices change in the real world. Exchange-traded contracts cannot follow a pure
diffusion process because exchanges are not open 24 hours per day. At the end of the
trading day a contract often closes at one price, and then opens the next day at a different
price. This causes a price gap, something which a diffusion process does not permit.
Even during normal trading hours prices may not follow a diffusion process. If major
news hits the market, the impact can be almost instantaneous, causing prices to gap up
or down.

If a theoretical pricing model makes the assumption that prices follow a diffusion
process, when in fact they don’t, how is this likely to affect values generated by the
model? Consider a situation where an underlying futures contract is trading at 100 and
a trader feels that implied volatility in the option market is much too high. Because all
options are overpriced, the trader decides to sell the 100 straddle. Unfortunately,
immediately after he sells the straddle the market gaps up to 105. How will the gap
affect the trader’s position?


--- 第 403 页 ---

Models and the Real World

Figure 18-3

39S


--- 第 404 页 ---

396 Chapter 18

A trader who is short straddles does not want to see a gap in the market. The fact
that a gap has occurred will hurt the trader, but will it cause him only minor pain, or
will it destroy him? If the options are relatively long-term, say nine months, the gap in
the underlying price is unlikely to be the end of the world. After all, with nine months
remaining to expiration the underlying market could easily fall back to 100. And while
the gap has clearly hurt the trader, it is probably not disastrous.® But if the gap occurs
with only a very short time remaining to expiration, say one day, the trader is now ina
situation where he might very well be ruined. With only one day to expiration, there is
simply not enough time for the market to retrace its movement. The 100 calls which
the trader sold as part of his short straddle will act like short futures contracts. While
the spread began approximately delta neutral, after the gap the trader will find himself
naked short deeply in-the-money calls, each with a delta of 100, in a market which has
just made a giant leap upward. Figure 18-4 shows how prices might change with nine
months versus one day remaining to expiration.

With nine months remaining to expiration the 100 straddle increased in value by
approximately 7% (14.04/13.18 = 1.07). But with one day remaining to expiration the
100 straddle increased in value by 495% (5.00/.84 = 5.95), The gap was painful with
nine months to expiration, but it was devastating with one day to expiration.

The reason that the gap caused such a dramatic change in the one-day straddle was
that the delta of the 100 straddle was much more sensitive to a change in the price of
the underlying contract. With nine months to expiration the 100 call and put have a
gamma of only 2.2. But with one day to expiration they have a gamma of 38.1. In the
latter situation, with such a high negative gamma, any movement will undoubtedly be
very painful. The trader could reduce some of the damage if he were able to adjust the
position by purchasing futures as the market moved upward. But a gap is an instanta-
neous move; there is no opportunity to adjust. The very high gamma, combined with
an inability to make any adjustment, is what makes the gap so devastating.

Options have the unique characteristic of automatically, and continuously, rehedg-
ing themselves by changing their deltas as the price of the underlying contract changes.
It is this characteristic which buyers of options are paying for. A trader who uses a
theoretical pricing model attempts to take advantage of a mispriced option by estab-

Figure 18-4
Implied Volatility = 20%; Interest Rate = 6%

9 months to expiration 1 day to expiration

Futures Futures Futures Futures
at 100 at 105 at 100 at 105
100 call price 6.59 9.41 42 5.00
100 put price 6.59 4.63 42 0
100 straddle price 13.18 14,04 84 5.00

8. For simplicity, we assume that there is no change in implied volatility after the gap, Admittedly, this Is
unlikely to be the case.


--- 第 405 页 ---

Models and the Real World 397

lishing a delta neutral hedge against the underlying, and then manually performing the
rehedging process himself over the life of the option. This was the basis for the examples
in Chapter 5. If amodel assumes, as most do, that prices follow a diffusion process, the
model assumes that one can continuously maintain a delta neutral hedge. But when the
market gaps, the assumptions on which the model is based are violated. Consequently,
the values generated by the model are rendered invalid. This problem extends to any
application which attempts to replicate option characteristics through a continuous
rehedging in the underlying market. The proponents of portfolio insurance suffered their
greatest setbacks on October 19 and 20, 1987, when the market made several large gap
moves. Because of the gaps, the portfolio insurers were unable to make continuous delta
adjustments to their positions. As a consequence, they found that the cost of protection
offered by portfolio insurance was much greater than they had ever expected.

Since traditional pricing models make an unrealistic assumption about how prices
change, perhaps a model which makes a more realistic assumption would yield more
accurate theoretical values. Theoreticians tend to agree that underlying contracts in
most markets follow a combination of both a diffusion process and a jump process. Most
of the time prices change smoothly and continuously, with no gaps. Every now and
then, however, a gap will occur, instantaneously sending the price to a new level. From
there prices will again follow a smooth diffusion process until another gap occurs. If one
could generate a underlying price distribution which resulted from this jump-diffusion
process, and feed this distribution into a theoretical pricing model, the model should
give more accurate values.

A variation of the Black-Scholes model which assumes that the underlying contract
follows a jump-diffusion process has in fact been developed. If used correctly, this
jump-diffusion model does give values which are probably more accurate than tradi-
tional Black-Scholes values.” Unfortunately, the model is considerably more complex
mathematically than the traditional Black-Scholes model. Moreover, in addition to the
five customary inputs, the model also requires two new inputs: the average size of a
jump in the underlying market, and the frequency with which such jumps are likely to
occur. Unless the user can accurately estimate these new inputs, the values generated
by a jump-diffusion model may be no better, and might be worse, than those generated
by a traditional model. Most traders take the view that whatever weaknesses are
encountered in a traditional model can be best offset through intelligent decision making
based on actual trading experience, rather than through the use of a more complex
jump-diffusion model.

Since a gap in the market will have its greatest effect on a high gamma option, and
since at-the-money options close to expiration have the highest gamma, it is these
options which are likely to be mispriced by a traditional theoretical pricing model with
its continuous diffusion process. The closer one gets to expiration, the more suspect

7, Information on the jump-diffusion model can be found in most advanced texts on option theory. For
additional information see:
Merton, Robert, “Option Pricing when Underlying Stock Returns are Discontinous,” Journal of
Financial Economics, Volume 3, March 1976, pages 125-144.
Beckers, Stan, “A Note on Estimating the Parameters in the Jump-Diffusion Model of Stock Returns,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, March 1981, pages 127—140,


--- 第 406 页 ---

398 Chapter 18

model-generated values become. Consequently, traders pay less and less attention to
model-generated values as expiration approaches. It is common practice among floor
traders on option exchanges to take with them to the trading floor sheets with
theoretical values to enable them to make markets which are consistent with a
theoretical pricing model. But as expiration approaches traders are more likely to discard
their sheets because the values on the sheets become less reliable. With only one or two
days to expiration, most traders simply make decisions based on experience and
intuition. While this is perhaps unscientific, it sometimes makes better sense than
trading from model-generated values when the model is known to be incorrect.

AS a result of the gaps which occur in the real world, both a trader’s experience
and empirical evidence seem to indicate that a traditional model, with its built-in
diffusion assumption, tends to undervalue at-the-money options as expiration ap-
proaches. From a risk standpoint, this means that it can be very dangerous to sell a large
number of at-the-money options close to expiration, since any gap in the underlying
market can have devastating results. New traders, in particular, are advised to avoid
such positions. No risk manager will appreciate even experienced traders being short
large numbers of at-the-money options as expiration approaches.

Expiration Straddles

If it is dangerous to sell atthe-money options going into expiration, perhaps there is
some sense in taking the opposite position by purchasing at-the-money options as
expiration approaches. This may seem to contradict conventional option wisdom,
which contends that a trader should sell at-the-money options in order to take advantage
of the rapid time decay associated with such options. What traders tend to forget is that
there is always a tradeoff between risk and reward. If one sells at-the-money options,
the reward may be an accelerated profit if the market doesn’t move (high positive theta).
But the risk is an increased loss if the market does move (high negative gamma). Because
the model does not know about the possibility of a gap in the underlying market, the
risk is often greater than the reward. If one sells at-the-money options, the losses from
an occasional gap will more than offset the profits resulting from increased time decay.
An experienced trader will therefore tend to do the opposite of conventional wisdom.
If conditions are right, he will tend to buy at-the-money options close to expiration.

This is not to suggest that every time expiration approaches, a trader should run
out and buy at-the-money options. As with any strategy, conditions must make the
strategy attractive. But because so many traders are intent on selling time premium as
expiration approaches, it is often possible to find cheap at-the-money options. For
example, suppose that with three days remaining to expiration the Black-Scholes model
generates a value for an at-the-money call of .50, but that it is priced at .45. What can
we say about this call? While we may not know the exact value, we can certainly say
that the call is likely to be worth more than .50, since there is always the possibility of
a gap in the market. Clearly, if the call is trading at .45, but has a value in excess of .50,
it must be a good buy.

As with any strategy based on volatility, the trader who buys these calls will try to
establish a delta neutral position. Because of the synthetic relationship, if the calls are


--- 第 407 页 ---

Models and the Real World 399

underpriced the puts at the same exercise price will also be underpriced. A logical
strategy might be the purchase of at-the-money straddles. This enables a trader to buy
poth underpriced calls and underpriced puts, and to profit if the underlying market gaps
either up or down.

In theory all volatility strategies, including an expiration straddle, ought to be
periodically adjusted in order to remain delta neutral. However, with little time
remaining to expiration the model is not only unreliable with respect to theoretical
values, it is also unreliable with respect to deltas. Because it is impossible to say what
the right delta is, it is also impossible to say what the correct adjustment is. For this
reason, traders who initiate expiration straddles often forget about trying to adjust, and
simply sit on the position to expiration. This may not be the theoretically correct way
to handle a volatility position. But it may be the practical choice given all the uncertain-
ties associated with theoretical evaluation as expiration approaches.

Even if a trader carefully chooses his expiration straddles, the great majority of time
no gap will occur in the market. In any single case he is more likely to show a loss than
a profit. A trader needs to remember that the primary concern is not the profit or loss
from any single trade, but what happens in the long run. Going Dack to the roulette
example in Chapter 3, a player who buys a number at a roulette table can expect to win
only once in 38 plays. But if the theoretical value of the bet is 95¢, and the player can
buy the bet for less than 95¢, he expects to be a winner in the long run. If he pays a
very low price for the bet, say 50¢, he still expects to lose 37 times out of 38. But now
the bet is very attractive because even if he only wins once in 38 plays, this will still be
often enough to more than offset the small losses he takes each time he loses. The same
logic is true of expiration straddies. A trader may lose several times before winning.
When he does win, he can expect a return great enough to more than offset all the
previous losses.

Because a trader knows that he will lose much more often than he will win, a trader
should only invest an amount in expiration straddles which he is prepared to lose. But
when conditions are right, a trader ought to be willing to make the investment. Even if
he loses several times in succession, in the long run he will encounter gaps in the market,
or sudden increases in volatility, often enough to make such strategies profitable.

VOLATILITY IS INDEPENDENT
OF THE PRICE OF THE
UNDERLYING CONTRACT

When a trader feeds a volatility into a theoretical pricing model, the volatility defines a
One standard deviation price change at any time during the life of the option, regardless
of whether the underlying contract happens to be rising of falling in price. If a contract
is currently at 100, and we assume a volatility of 20%, a one standard deviation price
change is always based on this volatility of 20%. If at some later time during the life of
the option the contract should move up to 150 or down to 50, 20% is still assumed to
be the operative volatility.


--- 第 408 页 ---

400 Chapter 18

Unfortunately, this assumption seems to fly in the face of most traders’ experience.
If one were to ask a stock index or bond trader whether his market were more volatile
when rising or falling, he would probably say that it was more volatile when falling. On
the other hand, if one were to ask an agricultural or precious metal trader the same
question about his market, he would almost certainly give the opposite answer. Those
markets tend to be more volatile when rising. In other words, the volatility of a market
is not independent of the price of the underlying contract. On the contrary, the volatility
over time seems to be dependent on the direction of movement in the underlying
contract. In some cases a trader expects the market to become more volatile if the
movement is downward and less volatile if the movement is upward; in other cases a
trader expects the market to become more volatile if the movement is upward and less
volatile if the movement is downward.

Because volatility in some markets does seem to be dependent on the price of the
underlying contract, a further variation of the Black-Scholes model has been proposed.
The constant-elasticity of variance, or CEV, model® is based on an assumed relationship
between volatility and the price level of the underlying contract. This relationship
determines the probability of price moves of various magnitudes at each moment in
time. Price changes are still random under a CEV assumption, but the randomness varies
with the price of the underlying contract.

Like the jump-diffusion model, the CEV model is mathematically complex, and
therefore difficult for most traders to compute. And like the jump-diffusion model it
requires additional input in the form of a mathematical relationship between the
volatility and price movement in the underlying contract. Given these difficulties, the
CEV model has not found wide acceptance among option traders.

Over small periods of time the percent price changes in an
underlying contract are normally distributed, resulting in a
lognormal distribution of underlying prices at expiration

Does the real world look like a lognormal distribution? One way to answer the question
is to ask how percent price changes over small periods of time are distributed. If this
distribution is normal, then the prices at expiration are likely to be lognormally
distributed.

Figure 18-5a is a frequency distribution of daily price changes in the S&P 500 stock
index from 1989 through 1993. Each bar represents the number of occurrences of a
given price change to the nearest 14 percent. As one would expect, most of the changes
are relatively small and close to zero. As we move away from the zero in either direction,

8. For information on the CEV model see:
Cox, John C.; and Ross, Stephen A.; “The Valuation of Options for Alternative Stochastic Processes”;
The Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 3, March 1976; pages 145-166.
Beckers, Stan; “The Constant Elasticity of Variance Model and Its Implications for Option Pricing”;
Journal of Finance; June 1980; pages 661-673.
Schroder, Mark; “Computing the Constant Elasticity of Variance Option Pricing Model”; Journal of
Finance; Vol. 44, No. 1; March 1989; pages 211-219.


--- 第 409 页 ---

Models and the Real World 401

Figure 18-5a: S&P 500 Stock Price Index,
Percent Daily Price Changes 1989-1993

225

200-4

1754

Total number of days = 1265
Largest upward move = +3,.73 %
128-5 Largest downward move = -6.12 %
Mean = +.044%

Standard deviation = .795 %

1004 Annualized volatility = 12.653 %
Skewness = -.352
Kurtosis = +4.343

normal distribution

Occurrences

we encounter fewer and fewer occurrences. The distribution certainly seems to have
many of the characteristics of a normal distribution. But is it really a normal distribution,
and if it isn’t, how does it differ from such a distribution?

If the frequency distribution conforms exactly to a normal distribution, the tops of
the bars should coincide exactly with a true normal distribution. To find out if this is
the case, the mean (+.044%) and standard deviation (.795%) have been calculated for
all 1,265 daily price changes over the five-year period. From these numbers, a theoreti-
cally exact normal distribution has been overlaid on our frequency chart. Note that the
actual frequency distribution is similar to the normal distribution, but there are some
Clear differences. Because the bars representing the small price changes rise above the
normal distribution curve, there seem to be more small price changes than one would
expect from a true normal distribution. There are also several large price changes, or
outliers, which rise above the extreme tails of the normal distribution. These outliers
seem to indicate that there are more large moves in our frequency distribution than one
would expect from a true normal distribution. Finally, in the midsections, between the
peak of the distribution and the extreme tails, there seem to be fewer occurrences than
one would expect.

One might at first surmise that differences in Figure 18-5a between the S&P 500
frequency distribution and the true normal distribution are either unique to the S&P
500, or an aberration of the five-year period in question. It turns out, however, that price


--- 第 410 页 ---

402 Chapter 18

change distributions for almost all underlying markets exhibit characteristics which are
very similar to our S&P 500 distribution. There are usually more days with small moves,
more days with large moves, and fewer days with intermediate moves than are
predicted by a true normal distribution. These differences between the real world and
a theoretical distribution can also be seen in Figures 18-5b and 18-5c, the distribution
of price changes for German Bonds and soybeans over the same five-year period.

SKEWNESS AND KURTOSIS

Distributions such as those in Figures 18-5a, 18-5b, and 18-Sc are approximately
normal, but still differ from a true normal distribution. If one is trying to make decisions
based on the characteristics of a distribution, it might be useful to know how the actual
distribution differs from the normal. A perfectly normal distribution can be fully
described by its mean and standard deviation. But two other numbers, the skewness
and kurtosis, are often used to describe the extent of the difference between an actual
frequency distribution and a true normal distribution.

The skewness of a distribution (Figure 18-6a) can be thought of as the lopsidedness
of the distribution, or the extent to which one tail is longer than the other tail. If a
distribution is positively skewed, the right-hand tail is longer than the left-hand tail. If

Figure 18-5b: German Bonds, Percent Daily Price Changes 1989-1993

225

Total number of days = 1261
Largest upward move = +2.323 %
Largest downward move = -1.930 %
Mean = +.0038 %

Standard deviation = .3265 %
Annulaized volatility = 5.183 %
Skewness = -.009

Kurtosis = 6.473

200-7

17575

150754

125-4)

1005 normal distribution

Occurrences

754

50>

254

9. The calculation of skewness and kurtosis can be found in Appendix B.


--- 第 411 页 ---

Models and the Real World

403

Figure 18-5c: Soybeans, Percent Daily Changes 1989-1993

150

425-4 Total number of days = 1262
Largest upward move = +7.75 %
Largest downward move = -7.12 %
Mean = -.020 %
Standard deviation = 1.202 %

1005 Annulaized volatility = 19.084 %
Skewness = +.152
Kurtosis = +4.606

754

normal distribution

254

Occurrences

Figure 18-6a: Skewness

+2 +4 +6

Positive Skewness
(longer right tail)

Negative Skewness
(longer left tail)



--- 第 412 页 ---

404 Chapter 18

the distribution is negatively skewed, the left-hand tail is longer than the right-hand tail.
A true normal distribution has a skewness of zero. The frequency distributions in Figures
18-5a (S&P 500) and 18-5b (German Bonds) are slightly negatively skewed, while the
distribution in Figure 18-Sc (soybeans) is slightly positively skewed.

The kurtosis of a distribution (Figure 18-6b) is the extent to which the peak of the
distribution is unusually tall and pointed, or low and flat. A distribution with a positive
kurtosis has a tall, pointed peak (/eptokurtic), while a distribution with a negative
kurtosis has a low, flat peak (platykurtic). A perfectly normal distribution has a kurtosis
of zero (mesokurtic).

Note that a distribution with a low standard deviation also has a pointed peak, just
as a distribution with positive kurtosis. But a distribution with a low standard deviation
also has narrow tails, while a distribution with a positive kurtosis has long tails. A
positive kurtosis distribution is also narrower, or squeezed inward, in the midsection
between its peak and tails. The frequency distributions in Figures 18-5a, 18-Sb, and
18-5c exhibit the same positive kurtosis, as do almost all underlying markets. They have
higher peaks (more days with small moves), more elongated tails (more days with big
moves), and narrower midsections (fewer days with intermediate moves) than are
predicted by a true normal distribution.

Figure 18-6b: Kurtosis

Positive Kurtosis (leptokurtic)
- oO
i \

Neutral Kurtosis (mésokurtic) | \

Negative Kurtosis (platykurtic)



--- 第 413 页 ---

Models and the Real World 405

VOLATILITY SKEWS

There are clearly real problems associated with the use of a traditional theoretical pricing
model. Markets are not frictionless; prices do not always follow a diffusion process;
volatility may vary over the life of an option; the real world may not look like a lognormal
distribution. With all these weaknesses, one might wonder whether theoretical pricing
models have any practical value at all. In fact, most traders have found that pricing
models, while clearly not perfect, are an invaluable tool for making decisions in the
option market. While models don’t always work perfectiy, they have proven to be far
better than any other method of evaluating options.

Still, a trader who wants to make the best possible decisions cannot afford to ignore
the problems associated with a theoretical pricing model. Consequently, a trader who
uses a pricing model might look for a way to reduce the potential errors resulting from
these weaknesses. Initially, one might simply look for a better theoretical pricing model.
If such a model exists, then it will certainly be worth replacing the old model with the
new one. But “better” is a relative term. A model might be better in the sense that it
gives slightly more accurate theoretical values. But if the model is extremely complex
and difficult to use, or if it requires additional inputs of which a trader cannot always be
certain, then the model may merely substitute one set of problems for another. Given
the fact that most traders are not theoreticians, a more realistic solution might be to use
a less complex model and somehow fine-tune it so that it is consistent with the realities
of the marketplace.

A trader trying to offset weaknesses in a pricing model might make the assumption
that the marketplace is using the same model as the trader, and then ask how the
marketplace is dealing with the weaknesses in the model. This is somewhat analogous
to calculating implied volatility where we assumed that everyone was using the same
model, that the price of the option was known, and that everyone agreed on all the
inputs except volatility. From these assumptions we were able to determine the
Volatility that the marketplace was implying to the underlying contract. Now we want
to take the same general approach, but ask what weaknesses the marketplace is
implying to the model. This is a more difficult question to answer.

Figure 18-7 shows the settlement prices and implied volatilities for December
options on German Government Bond (Bund) futures traded on the London Interna-
tional Financial Futures and Options Exchange (LIFFE) on July 17, 1992. Since options
on LIFFE are settled like futures contracts, the effective interest rate for theoretical
calculations is zero, As a result, there is no economic value to early exercise, and one
can calculate all implied volatilities using the Black-Scholes model.

By most standards German Government Bonds are a very low-volatility contract.
Even so, the numbers do reflect many of the characteristics of option markets with
which traders have become familiar. Note that the implied volatilities for calls and puts
at the same exercise price are always the same. If this were not true, the prices would
reflect an arbitrage opportunity. A trader could profitably execute a conversion if the
calls were overpriced with respect to the puts; a trader could profitably execute a reverse
conversion if the puts were overpriced with respect to the calls. The fact that call and


--- 第 414 页 ---

406 Chapter 18

Figure 18-7

July 27, 1992; German Goverment Bond (Bund) Futures
December Futures Contract = 87.86; Days to Expiration = 119; Interest Rate = 0%

Exercise Cail Cail Implied Put Put
Price Price Volatility Price impiledVolatility
84.50 3.40 3.98 04 3.98
85,00 2.92 3.82 .06 3.82
85,50 2.46 3.76 10 3.76
86.00 2.02 3.68 16 3.68
86.50 1.64 3.62 25 3.62
87.00 1.25 3.62 .39 3.62
87.50 93 3.58 RY4 3.58
88.00 67 3.58 81 3.58
88.50 46 3.56 1100 3.56
89.00 31 3.60 1.45 3.60
89.50 20 3.62 1.84 3.62
90.00 13 3.69 2.27 3.69
90.50 .08 3.73 2.72 3.73
91,00 05 3.81 3.19 3.81
91,50 .03 3.87 : 3.67 3.87

put implied volatilities all line up indicates an efficient market with respect to arbitrage
relationships. !2

Unfortunately, the implied volatilities at different exercise prices do not line up, and
this presents a problem to someone who believes that the Black-Scholes model is one
hundred percent efficient. Can those traders trading the 89 call or put really believe that
the December futures contract will have a volatility of 3.60, while those trading the 85
call or put believe the December contract will have a volatility of 3.82?

If we assume that the exercise price, time to expiration, underlying price, and
interest rate are known, the theoretical value of an option in a Black-Scholes world will
depend solely on the volatility of the underlying contract over the life of the option.
There can be only one volatility over this period. It’s true we won’t know what that
volatility is until expiration arrives, at which point we can look back in time to see what
the volatility was. But the December Bund future can have only one volatility over its
life. Since all the December Bund options have the same underlying contract, it doesn’t
make sense for every exercise price to have a different implied volatility. A true adherent
of the Black-Scholes model would plug in his best guess about volatility and begin selling
those options which appeared to be overpriced and buying those options which
appeared to be underpriced. We might think of the marketplace as one big trader. If the
activity in the marketplace were a result of everyone believing in the efficiency of the

12.  Settiement prices, such as those in Figure 18-7, are intended to reflect an efficient market with respect
to arbitrage relationships. During the trading day, because there is a bid/ask spread for each option,
and because all trades do not take place simultaneously, markets may appear less efficient.


--- 第 415 页 ---

Models and the Rea! World 407

Black-Scholes model, the selling of overpriced options and the buying of underpriced
options would eventually cause the implied volatility of every option to line up exactly.
Yet this almost never happens in any market.

The marketplace, like every individual trader, is trying to evaluate options as
efficiently as possible, given all the information available. Whether one believes that
markets are efficient or not, one can certainly argue that the marketplace is at least trying
to be efficient. From the wide range of implied volatilities found in almost every option
market, we can reasonably infer that the marketplace does not think the Black-Scholes
model is one hundred percent efficient. Unfortunately, trying to identify the source of
the inefficiency may not be possible. It might have to do with the fact that markets are
not frictionless; or the fact that prices do not always follow a diffusion process; or that
volatility may vary over the life of an option; or that the real world may not look like a
lognormal distribution. Whatever the reason, the marketplace believes that options at
any moment are priced efficiently, even if those prices happen to differ from model-gen-
erated values.

For traders using a theoretical pricing model, prices are often expressed in terms of
their implied volatilities. A trader who wants to continue using a theoretical pricing
model, but wants to use it ina way which is consistent with the way the marketplace
is apparently using the model, might look to the distribution of implied volatilities for
additional information. He might begin by plotting the implied volatilities across
different exercise prices, and then draw a graph that fits the data points. This has been
done in Figure 18-8a for December Bund options.

The resulting graph, usually referred to as the volatility skew, has a well defined
shape. The low point of the graph is close to the price of the underlying contract (87.86),
and the tails of the graph rise as we move to exercise prices further away from the
underlying price. One inference which most traders draw from this shape is that the
marketplace appears to believe there is a better chance for a large price move in the real
world than is predicted by the Black-Scholes model. This is not unreasonable if we look
again at Figures 18-5a, 18-5b, and 18-5c. The outliers seem to indicate that large moves
occur more frequently in the real world than is predicted by a normal distribution. It is
the possibility of these large moves which apparently causes the marketplace to inflate
the prices of options which are far out-of-the-money or deeply in-the-money.

We can also see that some options are clearly too expensive or too cheap with
respect to their neighbors. We may not know exactly what the 88.50 call is worth, but
we can see that it is clearly too cheap with respect to the 88 and 89 calls. In the same
way, we may not know what the 87 put is worth. But it is clearly too expensive with
respect to the 86.50 and 87,50 puts. In the former case, a trader might try to sell the
88.50/89.00/89.50 butterfly. In the latter case, a trader might try to buy the
86.50/87.00/87.50 butterfly. Whatever we think of the skew, there ought to be a
smooth progression of implied volatilities from one exercise price to the next.

A trader using the Black-Scholes model might take the view that the volatility skew
contains useful information which can be incorporated into the decision-making proc-
ess. While he might believe that options are generally either overpriced or underpriced,
he might also believe that the volatility skew reflects the relative value of options. He


--- 第 416 页 ---

408 Chapter 18

Figure 18-8a
4.00

3.955

3.904

3.864

380+

3.757

Implied Volatility

3.707

3.65

" 3.60

© 8.55 +
84,0 85.0 86.0 87.0 88.0 89.0 90.0 91.0 92.0

Exercise Price

might therefore look for a method of using the skew as part of his method of evaluating
options. Unfortunately, dealing with a volatility skew can be a problem because there
is no exact formula to use as a guide. Moreover, each trader tends to use the skew ina
way that best serves his ultimate goal. A market maker might treat the skew one way,
while a speculator or hedger treats the skew ina different way. Additionally, each trader
must determine the relative accuracy of the information reflected in the skew. A trader
who disagrees with a skew will find that some strategies will be more attractive than
others.

For example, consider a trader who is active in the Bund option market, and who
is trying to find a simple way to integrate a volatility skew into his theoretical pricing
model. He wants his theoretical values to be consistent with the skew, but he also has
an opinion on volatility. What might the trader do? Going back to Figure 18-7, we can
see that the at-the-money implied volatility in the Bund option market is approximately
3.58. Suppose a trader felt that implied volatility was too low, and that a more
reasonable volatility was .25 percentage points higher, at 3.83. If the trader still believed
that the skew represented the relative value of options, he might raise the whole skew
.25 volatility points and use these new volatilities to evaluate options at different
exercise prices. This would reflect his opinion that implied volatility was too low, but
would also take into consideration the relative value of options reflected by the skew.

Ina similar manner, the trader could also shift the skew right or left as the price of
the underlying contract changed. If the underlying contract several weeks later were to



--- 第 417 页 ---

Models and the Real World 409

move up 2.00, a trader could Keep the shape of the skew constant but shift the whole
skew up 2 points. At the same time, he could raise or lower the skew, using the
at-the-money options as a reference point, to reflect his opinion that the implied
volatility was either too high or too low. He could again use the resulting skew to
evaluate options at different exercise prices, and from this information to decide on a
strategy. The result of shifting a skew either up or down, or from side to side, is shown
in Figure 18-8b.

Shifting the whole skew might be a reasonable approach if a trader believes that
the skew will remain constant in the face of changing market conditions. But is this
likely? The implied volatilities at different exercise prices are likely to depend on how
the marketplace views the likelihood of large moves in the underlying market. But all
moves are relative, both with respect to the underlying price and to time. In relative
terms a 4 point move in the underlying contract is larger with the underlying contract
at 80 (a 5% move) than with the underlying contract at 100 (a 4% move). In relative
terms a four-point move over a two-week period is larger than a four-point move over
a two-month period.

The fact that the volatility skew is likely to change with changing market conditions
is born out in Figure 18-8c. The skew changed its shape, generally becoming more
severe, as time passed. It also changed its position as both the price of the underlying
contract and implied volatility changed. This poses a problem for a trader trying to
incorporate a volatility skew into a theoretical pricing model. Pricing models are not

Figure 18-8b

4.30 T r l
4.204 iN |
skew with ali
volatilities raised .25 ,
4.10+ | ; + +
> 400 pat |
z£ \ . a skew with underiying
3 \ contract 2.00/higher
i) . \
> 3.90} — 7 + |
3 Ty
£ S
iz ieee eel :
= 9.80 or 7 - +
3.70--
3.604 a abe fe
current skew ~~
3.60+- - —— y a 4
84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94

Exercise Price


--- 第 418 页 ---

410 Chapter 18

Figure 18-8c

6.00
\
\
5.504 \ é
\ 5 weeks to expiration /
\ Bund futures = 91.57 f
f
\ /
44 ks ti irati \
a weeks to expiration
Z 5.00 Bund futures = 69.23 \. /
°
>
3
2
a
E 4.507 tt
7 17 weeks to expiiration
Bund futures = 87,86
4.007 | ~~
N 2 weeks to expiration
~ Bund futures = 91.57
3.5077 T T T T T
84 86 88 90 92 94 96

Exercise Price

only used to evaluate options under current conditions. They are also used to evaluate
risk under changing market conditions. If a trader wants to fully incorporate a skew into
his model, he needs to know how the skew is likely to change with changing market
conditions.

We noted that movement in the underlying contract is relative, both with respect
to the current price of the underlying contract and time to expiration. If we are using a
theoretical pricing model, we might ask how the model expresses movement in the
underlying contract. If we know this, we can determine how the model expresses the
relationship between the price of the underlying contract and different exercise prices.
This may enable us to determine how the skew will change.

In the Black-Scholes model, movement in the underlying contract is measured on
a logarithmic scale,!3 and the relationship between the exercise price of an option and
the current underlying price is expressed as the logarithm of the exercise price divided
by underlying price. At the same time, movement over time is governed by a square
root relationship, so that in the Black-Scholes model the relative amount of movement
required to reach an exercise price is fully expressed as

[natural logarithm (exercise price / underlying price)] / square root (time)

13. For a more detailed discussion of the logarithmic function, and the relationship between time and
volatility, see Appendix B.


--- 第 419 页 ---

Models and the Reai Worid 411

where time is expressed in terms of years. Since we are using the Black-Scholes model
to calculate the implied volatilities of the various options, and since the Black-Scholes
model expresses exercise prices in the way we have just described, perhaps it makes
sense to express the skew exercise prices in the same way. This has been done in Figure
18-8d.

With our new x-axis measurements the skews start to look very much alike. We
still need to take into consideration the fact that the skews occupy different positions
because they represent different volatilities. In order to generalize the volatility scale
(the y-axis), we might consider expressing all volatilities for a given skew in terms of the
volatility of a theoretical at-the-money option. For example, going back to Figure 18-8a,
we can see from the graph that with the underlying contract at 87.86, the implied
volatility of an option with an exercise price of 87.86 (a theoretically at-the-money
option) would be approximately 3.57%. We can therefore express the volatility at each
exercise price as the difference between that exercise price’s volatility and 3.57. Using
this approach, the 91 exercise price, with an implied volatility of 3.81 (the point where
the graph crosses the 90 exercise price), would be assigned a value of

3.81 — 3.57 = .24
The 86 exercise price, with an implied volatility of 3.68, would be assigned a value of
3.68 — 3.57 = .11
Figure 18-8d
6.00 T
\
\ ;
5.50 \ a
\. /
‘ ;
5.004 \ va

4.504

Implied Volatility

41 weeks to expiration *
Bund futures = 89.23

2 weeks to expiration

4.007 Bund tutures = 91.57
- ae
17 weeks to expiration
Bund tutures = 87.86
3,50 T a Tt r
0.15 0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15

In(ex. price/fut. price)/sqrt(time)


--- 第 420 页 ---

412 Chapter 18

This method is satisfactory when implied volatilities remain relatively constant. But
suppose the implied volatility in the Bund option market were to double to 7.00%.
Under these circumstances, the implied volatilities at each exercise price can also be
expected to double. The 90 exercise price, instead of having an implied volatility of
3.81, will have an implied volatility of 7.62. And the 86 exercise price, instead of having
an implied volatility of 3.68, will have an implied volatility of 7.36. Since implied
volatility can change in the marketplace, we need a method of relating the overall
change in implied volatility to the change in each exercise price’s implied volatility. The
easiest way to do this is to express the implied volatility at each exercise price as a
percent of the at-the-money implied volatility.

For example, with an at-the-money implied volatility of 3.57, the 90 exercise price,
with an implied volatility of 3.81, would be assigned a value of

3.81 / 3.57 = 106.7%
The 86 exercise price, with an implied volatility of 3.68, would be assigned a value of
3.68 / 3.57 = 103.1%

Combining this method of expressing the implied volatility in terms of a percent of
at-the-money volatility, together with the logarithmic/time method of expressing the
exercise price, yields the transformations shown in Figure 18-8e.

Figure 18-8e

140 T

_
a
o
|
D

weeks to expiration ’
Bund futures = 91.57 f

=
DS)
fo)

/
ra

11 weeks to expiration SN 4 wo Sw

Implied Volatility (% of at-the-money)
3

ks to expiration
Bund futures i= 89.23 “sb ey Bun futures = 91,57
400+ | SS ae
17 weeks to gxpiration
Bund futures = 87.86
90 7 t
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15

In(ex. price/fut. price)/sqrt(time)


--- 第 421 页 ---

Models and the Real World 413

With our new x-axis and y-axis the skews, while not identical, tend to look much
alike. If we were to make the assumption that the skew would look similar to those in
Figure 18-8e under all conditions, we might think of the skew as an additional variable
in a theoretical pricing model. Instead of the five usual variables (time to expiration,
exercise price, underlying price, interest rates, volatility), we now have six (Figure
18-9).

If we are going to feed the skew into the model as a variable, we need to do itina
way which the model understands. This means we need to find a formula by which to
express the skew. While this may sound difficult, many skews can be expressed as
simple equations. In Figure 18-10 a function has been graphed out which approximates
the shape of the volatility skews in Figure 18-8. If we make the assumption that this
function gives a good approximation of the skew, we can use the function as the
volatility skew variable in our theoretical pricing model. To analyze the value of an
option position under changing assumptions about underlying price, time to expiration,
and volatility, we need only express the volatility at each exercise price using this
function:

volatility at an exercise price =
the at-the-money volatility times f(x)

where the exercise price, E, is always expressed in relation to its underlying price, U,
and the amount of time to expiration, t:

In (E/U) / Vt

There is no law that says a trader must agree with the skew implied in the option
market. A trader might believe that there is little chance of an unexpectedly large move
in the underlying market. In this case, he can lower the wings of the skew. On the other

Figure 18-9

Time toe Expiration
Exercise Price

Underlying Price

— Theoretical a Theoretical
a > Pricing Model Value

Interest Rates
Volatility

Volatility Skew



--- 第 422 页 ---

414 Chapter 18

Figure 18-10
140 : r
i i
: ! |
| |
\ | |
1909 * 4 |
> \ 4 wings| intlated
Q \ 4 (better chance of a large move)
e \
rt \
&
= 120 4
6
i) ‘
x
= ‘.
z \
ics 410
o
>
3
a
=
100
wings| reduced
(smaller change of a large move)| f(x) = 30* ve 244
whereix = In(ex.price/fut. price)/sqrt(time)
90-r

2
+045 -0.10 -0.08 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15
In(ex. price/fut. price)/sqrt(time)

hand, if he believes that a there is a high probability of an unusually large move, he can
raise the wings of the skew. This type of modification is also shown in Figure 18-10.

A market maker can also use the skew to adjust his bids and offers. If the market
maker finds himself with a large positive gamma position and wants to sell options to
cut back on the risk associated with the position, he can shift the skew slightly
downward. This will have the effect of lowering his bids and offers on all options. If the
market maker finds himself short a large number of out-of-the-money calls or puts, he
can adjust his skew by raising the wings. This will have the effect of raising his bids and
offers on out-of-the-money options.

The Bund options in our example form what is probably the most common skew
shape, a smile which is approximately symmetrical. But this is not always the case.
Skews can be symmetrical or asymmetrical, and they can reflect inflated or defiated
implied volatilities across exercise prices, depending on how the marketplace sees the
possibility, and consequences, of various moves in the underlying market. In addition,
in stock index markets, because it is not always possible to take advantage of a mispriced
arbitrage relationship (see Chapter 15), calls and puts with the same exercise prices do
not necessarily trade at the same implied volatility. For this reason, many traders in stock
index markets prefer to evaluate call and put skews separately.

As an example, Figures 18-11a and 18-11b represent the implied volatilities of
March 1993 OEX calls and puts with different amounts of time remaining to expira-


--- 第 423 页 ---

Models and the Real World 415

Figure 18-11a: OEX March 1993 Calls

30 T

5 weeks to expiration
OEX = 406.26

20 1 week fo exairation

15+

\mplied Volatility (°%)

T as
360 370 3B0 390 400 410 420 430
Exercise Price

Figure 18-11b: OEX March 1993 Puts

30

1
;

| _Sweel
287 OEX

i

ks to expiration _
06.26 (406.79)

i
i
nl

Of ee —- pt
z eS H ;
is ~ |
= ~~
3 Po ~ 1
nel { mo .
2 a
‘a 154 — = - | Z —4
|?
10+ — an a —4 +
W a |
OEX =|396.64 (397.28)
4 |
{ i
or T + - T
360 370 360 390 400 410 420 430

Exercise Price



--- 第 424 页 ---

416 Chapter 18

tion.!2 Note the extreme inflation of downside exercise prices, both for calls and puts.
While it may not be possible to determine exactly what is causing the skew to have this
particular shape (it may indicate that the marketplace believes stock markets go down
faster than they go up—as witness October 1987—or it may reflect the fact that stock
index options are often used to hedge long stock portfolios), the marketplace seems to
be giving greater relative value to lower exercise prices. A trader who wanted to use the
marketplace’s relative evaluation might try to integrate the skew into his theoretical
pricing model.

As before, we might try to generalize the skew by expressing each exercise price
in terms of a logarithmic relationship to the underlying index price. Stock index prices,
like stock prices, are assumed to be lognormally distributed around the forward price of
the index, i.e., the current index price plus carrying costs less dividends. It therefore
makes sense to express the exercise price in relation to the forward price rather than to
the index price:

in(exercise price/forward price) / Vtime

This has been done in Figures 18-11c and 18-11d. (The forward price of the OEX is in
parenthesis.)

While there are clearly some differences between volatility skews in Figures 18-11c
and 18-11d, there is considerably more consistency than one would expect from Figures
18-11a and 18-11b. If a trader wanted to find functions, one for calls and one for puts,
by which the skews could be expressed, he could use these functions to analyze a
position under a wide variety of market conditions.

It is only in the last several years that traders have begun to appreciate the
importance of volatility skews, both as an evaluation tool and as a risk management
consideration. This section is intended not as a solution to all the problems that traders
encounter in analyzing and using volatility skews, but as an introduction to how traders
approach the problem. Each trader as he gains more experience must decide how best
to deal with the volatility skew, given the characteristics of the market in which he is
dealing, as well as his ultimate goal in that market.

A FINAL THOUGHT

Because the use of a theoretical pricing model requires a trader to make so many
different decisions, both with respect to the inputs into the model and the degree to
which the assumptions on which the model is based are likely to be accurate, the new
option trader may feel that making the right decisions is simply a matter of luck. While
luck undoubtedly plays a role in the short run, in the long run those traders who are
willing to put in the effort required to understand how models work always seem to
come out ahead. Experienced traders know that using a model, with all its problems, is
still the best way to evaluate options and manage risk.

12. Because of the possibility of early exercise, the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model was used to calculate OEX
implied volatilities.


--- 第 425 页 ---

Models and the Real World 417

Figure 18-11¢: OEX March 1993 Calls

220 ; ;
\ ; 5 weeks t6 expiration i ' |
\ ' OEX = 406,26 (406.79)
‘
2004- —— an ae —-4 i
i}
: \
i |
' i
480
i
I

rn

: 141 weeks to expiration
1604 ————< oer soccer 7.28)

Implied Volatility (% of at-the-money)

140-+-—-— +-week-te-expiration—- —-
OEX = 412.67 i (412.89)
i H i
4207, - 4
|
1 ; a“
1 Le
1004 -~ - -
‘ |
! | I
: ! |
i mm 1
80 i } + t 7
0.3 -0.2 0.1 0.0 0.4 02 03

In(ex. price/forward price)/sqrt(time)

Figure 18-11d: OEX March 1993 Puts

220 T
\

200
—
é 180-5
fe) 11 weeks tolexpiration
& OEX = 396.64 (397.28)
£ Se
® 160 s
3
xe
2 1 week tojexpiration
= 140 OEX = 412.67 (412.89)
i]
>
oD
2 120
ao -
E aq

100-—~5 weeKS to expiration a :

OEX = 406.26 (406.79) SI os
80-++ + 1
-0.3 -0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.3

In(ex. price/forward price)/sqrt(time)



--- 第 426 页 ---

418 Chapter 18

This text, like many others on options, may have left the reader with the impression
that option evaluation and trading can be reduced to a series of arithmetic calculations,
The science of option evaluation is an important part of any trader’s education, but
mathematical models are only a tool to help the trader make decisions. Successful option
trading is at least as much an art as a science, and a trader must know where science
leaves off, and other intangible assets, whether intuition or market feel or experience,
begin. This brings us to one final point, and perhaps the most important principle of
option trading: there is no substitute for common sense. A trader who slavishly uses a
model to make every trading decision is heading for disaster. Only a trader who fully
understands what a model can and cannot do will be able to make the model his servant
rather than his master.


--- 第 427 页 ---

“+ Appendix A +

A Glossary of Option
and Related Terminology

Alt or None (AON)—An order which must be filled in its entirety or not at all.
American Option—An option which can be exercised at any time prior to expiration.

Arbitrage—The purchase and sale of the same product in different markets to take
advantage of a price disparity between the two markets.

Asian Option—Average price option.

Assignment—The process by which the seller of an option is notified of the buyer’s
intention to exercise.

At-the-Money—An option whose exercise price is equal to the current price of the
underlying contract. On listed option exchanges the term is more commonly used to
refer to the option whose exercise price is closest to the current price of the underlying
contract.

Automatic Exercise—The exercise by the clearing house of an in-the-money option
at expiration, unless the holder of the option submits specific instructions to the
contrary.

Average Price Option—An option whose value at expiration is determined by the
average price of the underlying instrument over some period of time.

Backspread—A spread, usually delta neutral, where more options are purchased than
sold, and where all options have the same underlying contract and expire at the same
time.

Backwardation—A futures market where the more distant delivery months trade at a
discount to the nearterm delivery months.

Barrier Option—An option which will either become effective or cease to exist if the
underlying instrument trades at some predetermined price prior to expiration.

419


--- 第 428 页 ---

420 Appendix A

Bear Spread—Any spread which will theoretically increase in value with a decline in
the price of the underlying contract.

Box—A long call and short put at one exercise price, together with a short call and long
put ata different exercise price. All options must have the same underlying contract and
expire at the same time.

Bull Spread—Any spread which will theoretically increase in value with a rise in the
price of the underlying contract.

Butterfly—The sale (purchase) of two options with the same exercise price, together
with the purchase (sale) of one option with a lower exercise price and one option with
a higher exercise price. All options must be of the same type, have the same underlying
contract, and expire at the same time, and there must be an equal increment between
exercise prices.

Buy/Write—The purchase of an underlying contract together with the sale of a call
option on that contract.

Cabinet Bid—On some exchanges, a bid smaller than the minimum increment,
permissible between traders desiring to close out positions in very far out-of-the money
options.

Calendar Spread—A time spread.

Call Option—A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer acquires the
right, but not the obligation, to purchase a specified underlying contract ata fixed price
on or before a specified date. The seller of the call option assumes the obligation of
delivering the underlying contract should the buyer wish to exercise his option.

Cap—A contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby the
borrower is assured of paying no more than some maximum interest rate for borrowed
funds. This is analogous to a call option where the underlying instrument is an interest
rate on borrowed funds.

Chooser Option—A straddie where the owner must decide by some predetermined
date whether to keep either the call or the put.

Christmas Tree—A spread involving three exercise prices. One or more calls (puts)
are purchased at the lowest (highest) exercise price and one or more calls (puts) are sold
at each of the higher (lower) exercise prices. All options must expire at the same time,
be of the same type, and have the same underlying contract.

Class—all options of the same type with the same expiration date and same underlying
instrument.


--- 第 429 页 ---

A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 421

Clearing House—The organization which guarantees the integrity of all trades made
on an exchange.

Clearing Member—A member firm of an exchange which is authorized by the
clearing house to process trades for its customers, and which guarantees, through the
collection of margin and variation monies, the integrity of its customers’ trades.

Collar—A contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby
the borrower is assured of paying no more than some maximum interest rate for
porrowed funds, and whereby the lender is assured of receiving no less than some
minimum interest rate on loaned funds. This is analogous to an option fence where the
underlying instrument is an interest rate on borrowed funds.

Combination—A two-sided option spread which does not fall into any well defined
category of spreads. Most commonly it is used to refer to a long call and short put, or
short call and long put, which together make up a synthetic position in the underlying
contract.

Compound Option—An option to purchase an option.

Condor—The sale (purchase) of two options with different exercise prices, together
with the purchase (sale) of one option with a lower exercise price and one option with
a higher exercise price. All options must be of the same type, have the same underlying
contract, and expire at the same time, and there must be an equal increment between
exercise prices.

Contango—A futures market where the more distant delivery months trade at a
premium to the nearterm delivery months.

Contingency Order—An order which becomes effective only upon the fulfillment of
some predetermined condition(s) in the marketplace.

Conversion—A long underlying position together with a short call and long put, where
both options have the same exercise price and expire at the same time.

Covered Write—The sale of a call (put) option against an existing long (short) position
in the underlying contract.

Cylinder—A fence or collar.
Deferred Start Option—A forward start option.

Delta (A)—The sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a change in the price of
the underlying contract.

Delta Neutral—A position where the sum total of all the positive and negative deltas
adds up to approximately zero.


--- 第 430 页 ---

422 Appendix A

Diagonal Spread—A long call (put) at one exercise price and expiration date, together
with a short call (put) at a different exercise price and expiration date. All options must
have the same underlying stock or commodity. This is simply a time spread using
different exercise prices.

Elasticity-—The percent change in an option’s value for a given percent change in the
value of the underlying instrument. Sometimes referred to as the leverage value.

Exchange Option—An option to exchange one asset for another asset.

Ex-dividend—The day on which a dividend paying stock is trading without the right
to receive the dividend.

Exercise—The process by which the holder of an option notifies the seller of his
intention to take delivery of the underlying contract, in the case of a call, or to make
delivery of the underlying contract, in the case of a put, at the specified exercise price.

Exercise Price—The price at which the underlying contract will be delivered in the
event an option is exercised.

Expiration (Expiry}—The date and time after which an option may no longer be
exercised.

European Option—An option which may only be exercised at expiration.
Extrinsic Value—Time value.
Fair Value—Theoretical value.

Fence—A long (short) underlying position, together with a long (short) out-of-the-
money put and a short (long) out-of-the-money call. All options must expire at the same
time.

Fill or Kill (FOK)—An order which will automatically be cancelled unless it can be
executed immediately and in its entirety.

Flex Option—An exchange-traded option where the buyer and seller are permitted to
negotiate the exact terms of the option contract. Typically, this includes the exercise
price, the expiration date, and the terms of exercise (either European or American).

Floor—aA contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby the
lender is assured of receiving no less than some minimum interest rate for loaned funds.
This is analogous to a put option where the underlying instrument is an interest rate on
loaned funds.

Forward Contract—A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer is
obligated to take delivery and the seller is obligated to make delivery of a fixed amount


--- 第 431 页 ---

A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 423

of a commodity at a predetermined price on a specified future date. Payment in full is
due at the time of delivery.

Forward Price—Taking into consideration all carrying costs on a contract, the price at
which a contract would have to be trading on some future date such that a trade made
at today’s price would just break even.

Forward Start Option—An option whose exercise price will be equal to the price of
the underlying instrument on some predetermined date.

Front Spread—A ratio vertical spread.

Fugit—The expected amount of time remaining to optimum early exercise of an
American option.

Futures Contract—A contract, usually exchange-traded, between a buyer and a seller
whereby the buyer is obligated to take delivery and the seller is obligated to make
delivery ofa fixed amount of a commodity at a predetermined price on some future date.
All profits and losses are realized immediately, and result ina cash credit or debit based
on daily changes in the settlement price of the contract.

Futures-Type Settlement—A settlement procedure used by commodity exchanges
whereby an initial margin deposit is made, but under which no immediate cash payment
is made by the buyer to the seller. Cash settlement takes place at the end of each trading
day based on the difference between the current day’s settlement price and the previous
day’s settlement price or the original trade price.

Gamma (T}—The sensitivity of an option’s delta to a change in the price of the
underlying contract.

Good ’til Cancelled (GTC)—An order to be held by a broker until it can either be
executed or is cancelled by the customer.

Guts—A strangle where both the call and the put are in-the-money.

Haircut—On equity option exchanges, money deposited by a trader with the clearing
house to ensure the integrity of his trades. This is similar to a margin requirement ona
commodity exchange.

Hedge Ratio—Delta

Hedger—A trader who enters the market with the specific intent of protecting an
existing position in an underlying contract.

Horizontal Spread—A time spread.


--- 第 432 页 ---

424 Appendix A

Immediate or Cancel (IOC)—An order which will automatically be cancelled if it is
not filled immediately. An IOC order need not be filled in its entirety.

Implied Volatility—Assuming ai! other inputs are known, the volatility which would
have to be input into a theoretical pricing model in order to yield a theoretical value
identical to the price of the option in the marketplace.

In-Option—A type of barrier option which becomes effective only if the underlying
instrument trades at some predetermined price prior to expiration.

In-Price—The price at which the underlying instrument must trade before an in-option
becomes effective.

In-the-Money—A cal! (put) option whose exercise price is lower (higher) than the
current price of the underlying contract.

Index Arbitrage—One of several strategies attempting to take advantage of the
relative mispricing of options, futures contracts, or the physical stocks underlying a stock
index.

Intermarket Spread—A spread consisting of opposing market positions in two differ-
ent underlying securities or commodities, or their derivative products.

Intrinsic Value—The amount by which an option is in-the-money. Out-of-the-money
options have no intrinsic value.

Iron Butterfly—A long (short) straddle, together with a short (long) strangle. All
options must expire at the same time and have the same underlying contract.

Jelly Roll (Roll}—A long call and short put with one expiration date, together with a
short call and long put with a different expiration date. All four options must have the
same exercise price and same underlying stock or commodity.

Kappa (K)—Vega.
Knock Out Option—An out-option
Ladder—A Christmas tree.

Long-Term Equity Anticipation Security (LEAPS)}—A long-term (usually more
than one year) exchange traded equity option.

Leg—One side of a spread position.

Limit—The maximum allowable price movement over some time period for an
exchange traded contract.

Limit Order—An order to be executed at a specified price or better.


--- 第 433 页 ---

A Glossary af Option and Related Terminology 425

Local—An independent trader on a commodity exchange. Locals perform functions
similar to market makers on stock and stock option exchanges.

Locked Market—A market where trading has been halted because prices have
reached their limit.

Long—A position resulting from the purchase of a contract. The term is also used to
describe a position which will theoretically increase (decrease) in value should the price
of the underlying contract rise (fall). Note that a long (short) put position is a short (long)
market position.

Long Premium—A position which will theoretically increase in value should the
underlying contract make a large move in either direction. The position will theoreti-
cally decrease in value should the underlying market sit still.

Long Ratio Spread—A backspread.

Look Back Option—An option whose exercise price will be equal to either the lowest
price of the underlying instrument, in the case of a call, or the highest price of the
underlying instrument, in the case of a put, over the life of the option.

Margin-—Money deposited by a trader with the clearing house to ensure the integrity
of his trades.

Market Maker—An independent trader or trading firm which stands ready to buy or
sell contracts in a designated market. Market makers perform duties similar to locals on
commodity exchanges, the primary difference being that a market maker is obligated to
make a two-sided (bid and ask) market in his designated contract.

Market If Touched (MIT)—A contingency order which becomes a market order if
the contract trades at or beyond a specified price.

Market On Close (MOC}—An order to be executed at the current market price as
near as possible to the close of that day’s trading.

Market Order—An order to be executed immediately at the current market price.
Naked—A long (short) market position with no offsetting short (long) market position.

Neutral Spread—A spread which is delta neutral. A spread may also be lot neutral,
where the total number of long contracts and short contracts of the same type are equal.

Not Held—An order submitted to a broker, but over which the broker has discretion
as to when and how the order is executed.

Omega (Q.}—The Greek letter sometimes used to denote an option’s elasticity.


--- 第 434 页 ---

426 Appendix A

One Cancels the Other (OCO)—Two orders submitted simultaneously, either of
which may be executed. If one order is executed, the other is automatically cancelled.

Order Book Official (OBO)—An exchange official responsible for executing market
or limit orders for public customers.

Out-of-the-Money—An option which currently has no intrinsic value. A call (put) is
out-of-the-money if its exercise price is more (less) than the current price of the
underlying contract.

Out-Option—A type of barrier option which is deemed to have expired if the
underlying instrument trades at some predetermined price prior to expiration.

Out-Price—The price at which the underlying instrument must trade before an out
option is deemed to have expired.

Out-trade—A trade which cannot be processed by the clearing house due to conflicting
information reported by the two parties to the trade.

Overwrite—The sale of an option against an existing position in the underlying
contract.

Parity—lIntrinsic value.

Pin Risk—The risk to the seller of an option that at expiration the option will be exactly
at-the-money. The seller will not know whether the option will be exercised.

Portfolio Insurance—A process whereby the quantity of holdings in an underlying
instrument is continuously adjusted to replicate the characteristics of an option on the
underlying instrument.

Position—The sum total of a trader’s open contracts in a particular underlying market.

Position Limit—For an individual trader or firm, the maximum number of open
contracts in the same underlying market permitted by an exchange or clearing house.

Premium—the price of an option.

Program Trading—aAn arbitrage strategy involving the purchase or sale of a mispriced
stock index futures contract against an opposing position in the stocks underlying the
index.

Put Option—A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer acquires the
right, but not the obligation, to sell a specified underlying contract at a fixed price on or
before a specified date. The seller of the put option assumes the obligation of taking
delivery of the underlying contract should the buyer wish to exercise his option.

Range Forward—A fence.


--- 第 435 页 ---

A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 427

Ratio Backspread—aA backspread.

Ratio Spread—Any spread where the number of long market contracts (long underly-
ing, long call, or short put) and short market contracts (short underlying, short call, or
long put) are unequal.

Ratio Vertical Spread—A spread, usually delta neutral, where more options are sold
than are purchased, and where all options have the same underlying contract and expire
at the same time.

Ratio Write—The sale of multiple options against an existing position in an underlying
contract. This is simply a covered write using more than one option.

Reverse Conversion (Reversal)—A short underlying position together with a long
call and short put, where both options have the same exercise price and expire at the
same time.

Rho (p)—The sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a change in interest rates.

Risk Conversion (Risk Reversal)—A fence which includes a long (short) underlying
position.

Roll—A jelly roll.

Scalper—A floor trader on an exchange who hopes to profit by continually buying at
the bid price and selling at the offer price in a specific market. Scalpers usually try to
close out all positions at the end of each trading day.

Serial Expiration—On commodity exchanges, options on the same futures contract
which expire in more than one month.

Series—aAll options with the same underlying contract, same exercise price, and same
expiration date.

Short—A position resulting from the sale of a contract. The term is also used to describe
a position which will theoretically increase (decrease) in value should the price of the
underlying contract fall (rise). Note that a short (long) put position is a long (short)
market position.

Short Premium—A position which will theoretically increase in value should the
underlying contract sit still. The position will theoretically decrease in value should the
underlying contract make a large move in either direction.

Short Ratio Spread—A ratio vertical spread.

Short Squeeze—A situation in the stock option market, usually resulting from a partial
tender offer, where no stock can be borrowed to maintain a short stock position. If


--- 第 436 页 ---

428 Appendix A

assigned on a short call position, a trader may be forced to exercise a call early in order
to fulfill his delivery obligations, even though the call still has some time value
remaining.

Sigma (o)—The commonly used notation for standard deviation. Since volatility is
usually expressed as a standard deviation, the same notation is often used to denote
volatility.

Specialist—A market maker given exclusive rights by an exchange to make a market
in either a specified contract of group of contracts. A specialist may buy or sell for his
own account, or act as a broker for others. In return, a specialist is required to maintain
a fair and orderly market.

Speculator—A trader who hopes to profit from a specific directional move in an
underlying contract.

Spread—A long market position and an offsetting short market position usually, but
not always, in the same underlying market.

Stock-Type Settlement—A settlement procedure in which the purchase of a contract
requires full and immediate payment by the buyer to the seller. All profits or losses from
the trade are unrealized until the position is liquidated.

Stop Limit Order—aA contingency order which becomes a limit order if the contract
trades at a specified price.

Stop (Loss) Order—A contingency order which becomes a market order if the con-
tract trades at a specified price.

Straddle—A long (short) call and a long (short) put, where both options have the same
underlying contract, the same expiration date, and the same exercise price.

Strangle—A long (short) call and a long (short) put, where both options have the same
underlying contract, the same expiration date, but different exercise prices.

Strap—aAn archaic term for a position consisting of two long (short) calls and one long
(short) put where all options have the same underlying contract, the same expiration
date, and the same exercise price.

Strike Price (Strike)—Exercise price.

Strip—An archaic term for a position consisting of one long (short) call and two long
(short) puts where all options have the same underlying contract, the same expiration
date, and the same exercise price. Also: A series of futures or futures options designed
to replicate the characteristics of a long-term contract or option.


--- 第 437 页 ---

A Glossary of Option and Related Terminology 429

Swap—An agreement to exchange different cash flows. Most commonly a swap
involves exchanging variable rate interest payments for payments calculated from a
fixed interest rate.

Swaption—An option to enter into a swap agreement.

Synthetic—A combination of contracts having approximately the same characteristics
as a different contract.

Synthetic Call—A long (short) underlying position together with a long (short) put.
Synthetic Put—A short (long) underlying position together with a long (short) call.

Synthetic Underlying—A long (short) call and short (long) put, where both options
have the same underlying contract, the same expiration date, and the same exercise
price.

Tau (t)—The commonly used notation for the amount of time remaining to expiration.

Theoretical Value—An option value generated by a mathematical model given cer-
tain prior assumptions about the terms of the option, the characteristics of the underly-
ing contract, and prevailing interest rates.

Theta (6)—The sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a change in the amount
of time remaining to expiration.

Three-Way—A position similar to a conversion or reversal, but where the long or short
position in the underlying instrument has been replaced with a very deeply-in-the-
money call or put.

Time Box—A long call and short put with the same exercise price and expiration date,
together with a short call and long put at a different exercise price and expiration date.
This is simply a jelly roll using different exercise prices.

Time Premium—Time value.

Time Spread—The purchase (sale) of one option expiring on one date and the sale
(purchase) of another option expiring on a different date. Typically, both options are of
the same type, have the same exercise price, and have the same underlying stock or
commodity.

Time Value—The price of an option less its intrinsic value. The price of an out-of the-
money option consists solely of time value.

Type—tThe designation of an option as either a call or a put.

Underlying —The instrument to be delivered in the event an option is exercised.


--- 第 438 页 ---

430 Appendix A
Variation—The cash flow resulting each day from changes in the settlement price of a
futures contract.

Vega—The sensitivity of an option’s theoretical value to a change in volatility.

Vertical Spread—The purchase of one option and sale of one option, where both
options are of the same type, have the same underlying contract, and expire at the same
time, but have different exercise prices.

Volatility—The degree to which the price of an underlying instrument tends to
fluctuate over time.

Volatility Skew—The tendency of options at different exercise prices to trade at
different implied volatilities.

Warrant—A long-term call option. The expiration date of a warrant may under some
circumstances be extended by the issuer.

Write—Sell an option.


--- 第 439 页 ---

“ Appendix B +

The Mathematics
of Option Pricing

OPTION PRICING MODELS

I. The Black-Scholes Model and Its Variations
Abbreviations used in the following mathematical formulae:

Cc = theoretical value of a call
P = theoretical value of a put
U = price of the underlying contract
E = exercise price
t = time to expiration in years
v = annual volatility expressed as a decimal fraction
r = risk-free interest rate expressed as a decimal fraction
e = __ base of the natural logarithm
In = natural logarithm
N(x) = the normal distribution curve
= - e(-x”/2)
N(x) = __ the cumulative normal density function (the area under N’(x)}

A. The Black-Scholes Model for evaluating European options on non-dividend paying
stocks (U = price of the underlying stock):!

C = UN(h) — Ee*t N(h-wvt)
P = -UN(-h) + Ee N(wvt-h)

where h = we

1. Black, Fischer and Scholes, Myron, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” /ournal of
Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 3, May/June 1973, pages 637-654.

431


--- 第 440 页 ---

432 Appendix B

For stocks which pay dividends, the stock price (U} can be replaced by the current stock
price less the present value of the expected dividends:

n
U= by dew
jel
where d, = each expected dividend payout over
the life of the option
t = the time in years to each dividend payout
The sensitivities of the Black-Scholes Model are:
call delta = (fh)
put delta =  -N(-h)
callgamma = ut gamma == N@
8 = PUES ~  UWt
Uv N’(h)
call theta Se Gt ESttN(h—- wt,
at
Uv N‘(h)
ut theta = eS - etNwit —h
Pp aT (
call vega =  putvegsa = UVtN%h
call rho = tEeN¢h-wvr)
put rho = -tEetN¢vvt-h)

B. The Black Model for evaluating European options on futures contracts (U = price of
the futures contract):?

C = Ue"tNth) — EettN(h— vt)
P = -Ue™N(-h) + Ee" N(vvt —h)

U ve
inf e |e 7 t

where h = Wr
The sensitivities of the Black Model are:
call delta =  eN(h)
put delta =  -e7tN(-h)
callgamma = ut gamma = et No)
6 = Pure ~ Uwt

call theta = Ue N(h) + rEe N(h— wt) + UettyN’(hy/2vt
put theta =  UettN(-h) — rEe N¢vvi-h) + Ue vN’(h)/2Vt-

2. Black, Fischer, “The Pricing of Commodity Contracts”, Journal of Financial Economics, No. 3, 1976,
pages 167-179.


--- 第 441 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 433

call vega = putvega = UetN(hyt
call rho = -tC
put rho = -tP

C. The Garman Kohthagen Model for evaluating European options on foreign curren-
cies (U = price of the foreign currency in domestic currency units):$

C = Vet N(h) — EeuttN(h— wt )
P = —U“#N(—-h) + EetytN(vvt-h)

U ¥
In Blt [tatty t

where h = we

ty = the risk-free rate in the domestic currency

t, = the risk-free rate in the foreign currency

The sensitivities of the Garman-Kohlhagen Model are:
call delta = — etN(h)
put delta = -eN(-h)
call gamma = putgamma = eXN'(h)
Uvvt_

call theta = ett Nh) - rEet N(h-wVt) — Ulett vN’(h)/2Vt
put theta = =estt N(-hy + rEet N(wVt-hy — Ue vN’(hy/2Vt-
call vega=putvega = UettN(hyt
call domestic rho = te*EN(h—-vt)
put domestic rho = —tewEN(vt—h)
call foreign rho =  -te"EN(h)
put foreign rho = te'EN(—h)

Notes: The theta in the foregoing formulae is expressed in terms of decay over one full
year. To express the theta in the more common form of daily decay, the resulting
number must be divided by 365.

The vega is expressed in terms of the sensitivity to a one-full-point (100-percent-
age-point) change in volatility. To express the vega in the more common form of the
sensitivity to a one-percentage-point change in volatility, the resulting number must be
divided by 100.

3. Garman, Mark B. and Kohlhagen, Steven W., “Forelgn Currency Option Values”, Journal of
International Money and Finance, Vol. 2, No. 3, December 1983, pages 231-237.
Grabbe, J. Orlin, “The Pricing of Call and Put Options on Foreign Exchange” , Journal of International
Money and Finance, Vol. 2, No. 3, December 1983, pages 239-253.


--- 第 442 页 ---

434 Appendix B

D. Darren Wilcox has suggested a variation on the Black Model where the underlying
contract (U) is assumed to be normally distributed and may therefore take on negative
values.4

C = eT(U-E)N(h) + et N’(hyvvt-
P = e(U-E)N(h) + eN(hyvvt - e-(U-E)

U-E
we

Note: Since this variation assumes a normal, rather than lognormal, distribution, the
volatility, v, is the standard deviation of absolute price changes, rather than the standard
deviation of logarithmic price changes.

The only difficulty in using the Black-Scholes Model or its variations is the
calculation of N(x), the cumulative normal density function. Values for N(x} can be
found in most statistical tables. Alternatively, the following approximation is suitable for
most practical applications:

Ifx 20, then
N(x) = 1 ~ N’(x)(.4361836k — .1201676k? + .9372980k3)
where k= 1/(1 + 332671 x1)
and N’(x) is the normal distribution curve previously described.
If x < 0, then N(x) = 1 — N(x)

where h =

II, The Cox-Ross-Rubenstein (Binomial) Mode!

The Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model makes the assumption that over any period of time the
underlying contract can move up (u) or down (d) by a given amount. The probability of
an up move is given by p, and the probability of a down move is given by 1 ~p. For
example, suppose a certain contract is trading at 100, and over the next time period the
contract will move up to 105 (u=5) or down to 95 (d=-5), and that there is a 50 percent
chance (p=.5) of either outcome. If this is the only time period remaining to expiration,
and there are no interest considerations, we can calculate the value of a 100 call as its
expected return at the end the period. The call is worth intrinsic value if the underlying
contract is above the exercise price, and zero if the underlying contract is below the
exercise price. Its expected return is:

. X (105 - 100) + 0 = 2.50

4. — Wilcox, Darren, “Spread Options in Energy Markets”, Research Paper, Goldman, Sachs & Co., March
1990.

5. Cox, John C.; Ross, Stephen A.; and Rubenstein, Mark; “Option Pricing: A Simplified Approach”;
Journal of Financial Economics, No. 7, 1979; pages 229-263
For a good discussion of the computation required, see: Meisner, James E. and Labuszewski, John W.;
“The Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model for Alternative Underlying Instruments”; Advances in Futures
and Options Research, Vol. 2, 1987; pages 263-278


--- 第 443 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 435

In the same way we can calculate the value of a 90 call as:
5 x (105 - 90) + 5 x (95 - 90) = 10

We can extend this approach by dividing the time to expiration into many small
periods, and assume that over each period the underlying contract will always move up
(u) or down (d). The result at expiration will be a binomial tree, with many possible
prices at expiration for the underlying contract. An example of a three-period binomial
tree is shown in Figure B-1.

If we assume that the probability, p, of an up move and the probability, 1-p, of a
down move, is the same at each node of the binomial tree, it is a simple matter to
calculate the probability of each price outcome at expiration. The expected return for
the option is the sum, for each outcome where the option is in-the-money, of the
difference between the option’s exercise price and the underlying price, multiplied by
the probability of that outcome. All outcomes where the option is out-of-the-money are
set to zero.

In order to create a binomial tree which will approximate a lognormal distribution
we can define the following:

us etn
d= 1/u
where n = __ thenumber of periods to expiration (the number of

branches on the binomial tree)

Figure B-1
A3 Period Binomial Tree
u=+5 115 (100 call = 15)
d= 5
a m
105 105 (100 call = 5)
100 100
95 95 (100 call = 0)
90

85 (100 call = 0)


--- 第 444 页 ---

436 Appendix B

v
t

the annual volatility of the underlying contract
the time to expiration in years

"ou

As n becomes very large, the resulting terminal prices of the binomial tree converge to
a lognormal distribution.

The probability, p, of an up move is determined by the requirement that the
underlying market be arbitrage-free, ie., that no profit can be made trading the
underlying contract. If there are no interest considerations, which is the case with a
futures contract, we can ensure that the underlying futures market is arbitrage-free by
defining the probability, p, of an up move as:

p = (1-d)/(u-d)

In an arbitrage-free stock market, the stock price must increase by the amount of
carrying costs over each period. If r is the risk-free rate, the rate, rr, by which the stock
price must increase over each period is:

rr= 1 + (rt/n)

We can ensure that the underlying stock market is arbitrage-free by defining the
probability, p, as:

p = (rr-d)/(u-d)

Finally, we must discount the expected return for the option by the carrying costs over
the life of the option by multiplying the expected return by 1/(rr)".
The basic form of the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model is:

n
1 no
= {—p)o-k kqn-kUE
k=0
1 (2 \ 7
ni k :
= J=—p)" Kms: Eu Kqn-k
, cry" ki(n-k)! p¥(1—p)?-*max(0,E-u*d" *U)

In order to use the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model to evaluate an American option,
we need to check whether at the beginning of each time period the value of the option
is such that early exercise is warranted. For example, in our two-period example with
the underlying at 100, we saw that the expected return for the 90 call was 10. If the
option were settled in cash, the theoretical value of the option would be 10 less the
carrying costs over the holding period. If the carrying costs were .25, the theoretical
value of the option would be 9.75. If, however, the option were American, everyone
would exercise the option in order to obtain 10 points right now. In other words, the
fact that the option is American would require us to set the theoretical value at 10.

If we define U(i,j) as the j* underlying price at the end of the i time period (see
Figure B-2), and C(i,j) or P(i,j) as the call or put value at each U(i,j), then we must check
to see whether each C(i,j) < U(i,j)-E, if we are evaluating an American call, or whether


--- 第 445 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 437

Figure B-2
~ U4,0)
U(i,j) is the jth underlying price UG.0)
at the end of the ith period ,
U(2,0) U(4,1)
U@,1)

u(1,0)
a Ul2,1) U(4,2)

U(1,1) UG@,2)
U(2,2) U(4,3)
U(0,0) is the current price u@3)
of the underlying contract ”
U(4,4)

each P(i,j) < E-Uli,j), if we are evaluating an American put. If either condition is true
the option becomes an early exercise canditate, and we set the value of C(i,j) equal to
U(i,j)-E, or the value of P(i,j) equal to E-U(i,j).

We begin by calculating each terminal value U(n,j} for j=0,...,.n. From these values
we can calculate the value of the option at each previous node, C(n-1,j) or P(n—I ,j) for
j=0,...,n-1. If C(n-1,j) turns out to be less than U(n-1,j)-E, or if P(n-1,j) turns out to be
less than E-U(n-1,j), the option value is set to parity, and the iterative procedure
continues. We continue to work backwards to C(0,0) or P(0,0) (the current value of the
call or put), always setting the value at each node, U(i,j), to max|C(i,j), U(i,j)-E] fora call,
or max[P(i,j), E-U(i,j)] for a put:

pci+1,j) + d-pyCa+i,j+)

pPd+1,j) + d-p)PGi+1,j+))
Ir

Since the delta of an option is its change in value fora given change in the price of
the underlying contract, we can also calculate call and put deltas from a binomial model:

call A = Ud,1) — UCL,0)


--- 第 446 页 ---

438 Appendix B

P(1,1) — P(1,0)
Ud,1)—U(,0)

The larger n is chosen, the more accurate the option value generated by the mode!
will be. Unfortunately, as n increases, the number of calculations required to evaluate
an American option increases geometrically. Most traders who use the Cox-Ross-Ruben-
stein model choose n somewhere between 25 and 50. This represents a reasonable
trade-off between computer time and accuracy.

put A =

Ill. The Whaley (Quadratic) Model®
The Whaley Model uses an approximation technique to estimate the critical price, U™,
at which an American option should optimally be exercised early. This critical price is
then used to determine the value of the option.
In order to find U* for a call, we must solve the equation:

E - Ut = e&9YU*N(hHEN(h-vvi)] + ((1-e©'N(h-wit))(U*/a,)1
(For convenience we will refer to the two sides of this equation as LHS (the left-hand
side] and RHS {the right-hand side].)

where b = carrying costs on the underlying instrument (for futures
b = 0; for stock b = r) and all other abbreviations are those
used in the Black-Scholes Model

Ut v2
nf = | + [>+F}

wt
Gd =  (-(N-1) + YQ(N-1)? + 4M/k)|/2
M = 2r/yv2
N = 2b/v2
k =~ Let

To solve for U* we pick a desired degree of accuracy, €, satisfying:
(LHS - RHS) /E<e
We then perform progressive iterations, each time replacing U* , With:
Utu1 = (E+ RHS —bU? |] / (1-4)
where b, = e®-9'N(hU*)(1-1/q,) + [1-26 N'(hU*/(wv t/a,

Once U" has been calculated to the desired degree of accuracy, the value of an
American call, C, and its delta, A, can be found by solving:

C=c + A(U/U")%

6.  Barone-Adesi, Giovanni and Whaley, Robert E., “Efficient Analytic Approximation of American Option
Values,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 42, No. 2, June 1987, pages 301-320.


--- 第 447 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 439

A= 8 + Ag(U/UNY/U

where Cc = the value of a European call
fs) = the delta of a European call
A, =  (U"/q,)f{l-e®'N(hU")]

In order to find U* for a put, we must solve the equation
E - Ut = e@*(EN(h- wt) - U*N(h)] — [(1 - e& 9 N(h)) (U*/q))]
(We again refer to the two sides of this equation as LHS the left-hand side] and RHS [the
right-hand sidel.)

where b = carrying costs on the underlying instrument (for futures
b = 0; for stock b = r) and al! other abbreviations are those
used in the Black-Scholes Model

us ve
«(F| + [+5 }

h wt

gq, =  KXN-l) - VON-1D? + 4M/k)|/2
M = 2t/y?

N = 2b/y2

kK = 1e™

To solve for U* we pick a desired degree of accuracy, e, satisfying:
(LHS — RHS) /E<e
We then perform progressive iterations, each time replacing UY with:
U",,, = [E- RHS - b,U*] / (1D)
where b, = e®N(hU')(1~1/q,) + [I-e@ N‘(hU") (vv) |/q,

Once U™ has been calculated to the desired degree of accuracy, the value of an
American put, P, and its delta, A, can be found by solving:

P=p+ A,U/U)%
A= 8 + Ayq(U/U*)2/U

where p

the value of a European put
the delta of a European put
— (U*/q,)[1-e®*N(hU")]

7]
ol


--- 第 448 页 ---

440 Appendix B

NORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS

Since the assumption that price changes are normally distributed plays such an impor.
tant role in many theoretical pricing models, it may be useful to know how to compute
some of the numbers associated with a normal distribution.

The Mean (m)

The mean (m) of a distribution of n occurrences is the average outcome of all the
occurrences (x,}:

n
i
m= 7%,
1=1

The Standard Deviation (co)
The standard deviation (o) of a distribution of n occurrences is defined as:”

n
1
wa & my
1=1

If a distribution is normal, approximately 68.3 percent of the occurrences fall
within one standard deviation of the mean, approximately 95.5 percent of the occur.
rences fall within two standard deviations of the mean, and approximately 99.7 percent
of the occurrences fall within three standard deviations of the mean.

Skewness (Sk) and Kurtosis (Ku)

Ifa distribution is approximately normal, it may be useful to know how the distribution
deviates from a true normal distribution. We can determine this by computing the
skewness and kurtosis of the distribution.

Many of the measures associated with a distribution are derived from a group of
numbers called moments. In general, the j moment of a distribution about the mean
is:

Bl

m, =

¥ @&-m)
1=1

To determine the skewness and kurtosis of a distribution, we need the second, third,
and fourth moments:

n
1
M, = 5 - my?
1=1

7. Because we are dividing by (n-1) this is technically the sample standard deviation. This is the form
which is most commonly used for volatility calculations.


--- 第 449 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 441

n
1
m; = — > @,-m)*
1=1
_ly ‘
My = Hy OM)
1=1

The skewness of a distribution is defined as:

ske ns
whess =
mzvM2
A perfectly normal distribution has a skewness of zero. If the distribution is positively
skewed {Sk > 0), the right tail is fonger than the left. If the distribution is negatively
skewed (SK < 0}, the left tail is longer than the right.

The kurtosis of a distribution is defined as:

. Mg
kurtosis = —5 - 3
M,
A perfectly normal distribution has kurtosis of zero (mesokurtic). If a distribution has a
positive kurtosis (Ku > 0), more occurrences fall in the middle and at the extreme tails
of the distribution (leptokurtic). If a distribution has a negative kurtosis (Ku < 0), fewer
occurrences fall in the middle and at the extreme tails of the distribution (platykurtic).

While almost all spreadsheets include the mean and standard deviation functions,
and many also include skewness and kurtosis, it may be worthwhile to do a sample
calculation.

Consider, for example, the pinball distribution in Figure 4-2 (reproduced in Figure
B-3}. In order to compute the mean, we must multiply the number of balls in each
trough by the number of the trough, add up the total (563), and divide by the total
number of balls (75):

mean = 563/75 = 7.507

To compute the standard deviation, for each ball we square the difference between
its trough and the mean, add up all 75 results, divide by the number of occurrences less
one (74), and take the square root of this number.

standard deviation = V1

Sh - my
ml

7 ¥) (&,~ 7.507)

1=1


--- 第 450 页 ---

Appendix B

Lbl'099
osros”
eal ep
ZLV 08
02s°09
Og’ d
LiS'Ep
040°02
perc
Lose
oot et
pee ey
perio
0&6°09
29°09
eLore
0

2Uone|Aeg =
seoueun209
jo J9qUINN

OSb'9S
egt'cp
ZLV-08
061'02e
e022)
Lt2e'9
O€e'a
fre
2£S20°
Ole%
£809
60°14
OLe'od
ece'0e
Leeep
ose"9s

powenbs
uopejAeq

c6r°2
e6b'9
e6r's
cé6r'y
cér'e
e6h'S
e6p't
c6y"
2og—
20g" t—
209°2-
20s"e-
LZ0g"'p—
2os"g—
zos°9-
209° L-

ueay ey)
woy
uopelaeg

© 9
r)
| wo
|

So
i

Nn OH ~ DO OO MO Ms~-e OM KF
- =

0 0

Sh
vb
el
ab
bb
OL

orn nor wD OM ©

anjeA seouauns0Q JaquNN
jouaqunn yYSnosL

€-@ einBl4



--- 第 451 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 443

- Y] 660.747

74
= ¥8.929
= 2.988

While a detailed calculation of the skewness and kurtosis would require an
inordinate amount of space, the relevant values are:

skewness

kurtosis

Hoi ou

Il Ul

8.810
185
213.455

M,
MVM,
185
8.810 V8.810
185

26.149
+.007 (the right tail is slightly longer than the left)

213.455
8.8102
2.750 - 3 ,
~ .250 (the distribution has a slightly flatter peak

than one would expect)

- 3

VOLATILITY CALCULATIONS

Historical Volatility

The historical volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the logarithmic price
changes measured at regular intervals of time. Since settlement prices are usually
considered the most reliable, the most common method of computing volatility involves
using settlement-to-settlement price changes. We define each price change (x,) as:

I fi
4 Pit

where P, is the price of the underlying contract at the end of the i® time interval

P,/P,, is sometimes referred to as the price relative.
As an example, consider the volatility of the price changes in Figure 5-1.


--- 第 452 页 ---

444 Appendix B

Underlying Deviation Deviation
Week Price In(P,/P,-1) Mean from Mean Squared
0 101.35

1 102.26 +.008939 007771 .000060
2 99.07 —.031692 -.032859 — .001080
3 100.39 +.013236 ~ _ 012069 .000146
4 100.76 +.003679 2 .002512 .000006
5 103.59 +.027699 3 026532  .000704
6 99.26 ~.042698 + —.043865 001924
7 98.28 ~.009922 -.011089 = .000123
8 99.98 +.017150 015982 000255
9 103.78 +.037303 036136 — 001306
10 102.54 ~.012020 ~.013188  .000174
+.011674 005778

We first calulate the standard deviation of the logarithmic price changes:

standard deviation = V(.005778/9)
= V.000642
= .025338

We then calculate the annual volatility by multiplying the standard deviation by the
square root of the time interval between price changes. Since we looked at price changes
every week, the time interval is 365/7:

025338 x V(365/7)
025338 x 52.14
025338 x 7.22
1829 (18.29%)

We can calculate the volatility of a stock, such as in Figure 5-2, in the same way
except that we must remember that the volatility is based on the forward price. This
requires two modifications. Over any interval of time, in order to maintain a theoreti-
cally arbitrage-free market, the stock price is expected to increase by the carrying costs
on the stock over that period. If we record stock price changes at weekly intervals, the
stock price is expected to rise by r/52, where ris the annualized, risk-free interest rate.
The price changes are therefore expressed as:

l “i
i O /52)P,,

When the stock gives up its dividend, this does not really cause a change in the stock
price. We therefore include the dividend, D, in the price of the stock when calculating
price change over the period when the stock goes ex-dividend:

annualized volatility

Wt

i

\I

il


--- 第 453 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 445

=| P+D
He DN /52)0P,)

Over short periods of time, or in a low-interest-rate environment, the impact of
interest rates on the forward price is small, and can usually be ignored when calculating
historical stock price volatility.

The Extreme Value Method®

When reliable settlement prices are unavailable, the extreme value method is an
acceptable alternative method of calculating historical volatility. The method uses high
and low prices during a period, and each data point, x,, is equal to:

x, = .601 - In(H/L,)
where H, = _ the highest price over time period t
L the lowest price over time period t

The volatility is the standard deviation of all X,, annualized by multiplying by the
square root of the number of time periods, t, in a year. If t is a daily interval, we must

Figure B-4: Using a Newton-Raphson Search to Find the Implied Volatility

theoretical value
at first quess

theoretical value
at second guess

Theoretical Value 9 —_______________ Jj

first guess
theoretical value é
at third guess ,
Option geet . ee
Brigg poe
vega at
: second guess
|
Implied
Volatility
Volatility >

8. Parkinson, Michael, “The Extreme Value Method for Estimating the Variance of the Rate of Return’,
Journal of Business, Vol. 53, No.1, 1980, pages 61-65.


--- 第 454 页 ---

446 Appendix B

multiply by the square root of the number of trading days in a year (approximately 253).
if t is a weekly interval, we must multiply by the square root of the number of trading
weeks in a year (approximately 52).

Calculation of Implied Volatility

While it is not possible to invert the Black-Scholes Model to arrive at an implied volatility
from a known option price, a Newton-Raphson search can be used to converge on the
implied volatiliry quite quickly. We first make a guess as to the option’s implied
volatility, and then use the option’s vega (sensitivity to a change in volatility) to come
progressively closer to the true implied volatility. This method is illustrated in Figure
B-4.

Because an option’s vega is relatively linear, the method converges very quickly,
usually with no more than four iterations, even with a poor first guess. The iterative
process is:

x =x
i+1 i v,
where p = __ the option’s price
x, = the volatility
y, = the option’s theoretical value at volatility x,
vy, = the option’s vega at volatility x,

We choose a desired degree of accuracy, €, and continue with the process until ly, - pl <
€, at which point x, is the desired implied volatility.

THE EXPONENTIAL AND NATURAL
LOGARITHM FUNCTIONS
Since the natural logarithm (In(x)}} and exponential function (e*) play such an important

role in most theoretical pricing models, a brief discussion of their use may be worth-
while.

Suppose r = an annual interest rate,
expressed as a decimal fraction
I = the amount of an investment
t = the time period over which the investment is made,

expressed in years

When r is continuously compounded, the value, V, of I at the end of the time
period, t, is given by:

V=et.]

When r is continuously compounded, the initial investment, I, required to yield V
at the end of the time period is given by:


--- 第 455 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 447

T=et.v

Lis referred to as the present value of V, i.e., V discounted by its carrying costs.
The yield, y, resulting from the continuous compounding of the interest rate, r, over
the time period is given by:

y = et—]

The annualized yield is y/t.
Example: If r=10% (.10), the value of a $2,000 investment in three months
(t=.25) if interest is compounded continuously will be:

V = et. $2,000 = 210-25 . $2,000
= 2925. $7,000 = 1.0253 - $2,000 = $2,050.63

Example: If r=6% (.06) and is compounded continuously, the amount of money
one would need to invest to have $5,000 after eight months (t=.667) would be:

I = ett. $5,000 = 2-957 . $5,000
2-04. $5,000 = .9608 - $5,000 = $4,803.95

Example: If r=15% (.15} and is compounded continuously, the total yield on a
six-month (t=.5) investment will be:

y=et—j] =e15-5—] = e075_] = 0779 (7.79%)
The total annualized yield is:
y/t = .0779/.5 = 1558 (15.58%)

If | is the amount initially invested, the continuously compounded rate of return,
r,, needed to yield V over some period of time, t, is given by:
r, = In(V/])

If V is greater than I, the resulting rate of return will be a positive number, If V is less
than I, the resulting rate of return will be a negative number. The annualized rate of
return is:

it

t=r/t=In(V/)/t

Example: Assuming continuous compounding, the annual rate of return required
for an initia! investment of $3,000 to yield $3,200 in nine months (t=.75) is:

In(3,200/3,000)/.75 = In(1.0667)/.75
0645/75 = .0861(8.61%)

Note that the exponential and logarithmic functions are inverses:

In(e*) = eh) = x

T


--- 第 456 页 ---

448 Appendix B

Because volatility is also a rate of return, and is assumed to be continuously
compounded, the exponential and logarithmic functions can be used to calculate
expected price changes of an underlying contract.

Example: Suppose a certain futures contract is trading at a price, P, of 50 and has
an annual volatility, v, of 12%. A one standard deviation upward price change is

ev-P=e!2.50 = 1.1275 - 50 = 56,37
A one standard deviation downward price change is
ev. P=en!2. 50 = 8869 - 50 = 44.35
Since we know that one standard deviation takes in about 68 percent of all outcomes,
we know that if the volatility figure of 12% is correct, there is a 68 percent chance that
one year from now the same futures contract will be trading between 44.35 and 56.37.

What about a two standard deviation price change? If the move is upward, we
calculate:

2122.50 = e244. §0 = 1.2712 - 50 = 63.56
if the move is downward, we calculate:
e122. 50 = 44. 50 = 7866 - 50 = 39.33
Since we know that two standard deviations takes in about 95% of all outcomes, we
know that if the volatility figure of 12% is correct, there is a 95% chance that one year
from now the same futures contract will be trading between 63.56 and 39.33.

For time periods other than one year we must also take into consideration the
square root relationship between time and volatility. If a one standard deviation price
change over a period is given by v, then a one standard deviation price change over a
period which is twice as long is v V2. Similarly, a one standard deviation price change
over a period only half as long is v V.5. The generalized rule is:

volatility (standard deviation) over the period t=v-Vt

where v is the annualized volatility and t is the time period in years. This enables us to
express a move of n standard deviations over t as either:

env. P (an upward move]
or
ev. P (a downward move)

where P is the current price of the contract.

Example: With an underlying contract at 84.00 and an annual volatility of 16%,
a one and two standard deviation price change over a three month period (t = .25) is:
e10V.25 . 84.00 = e165. 84.00 = &8. 84.00
= 1.0833 - 84.00 = 91.00 (up 1 standard deviation)


--- 第 457 页 ---

The Mathematics of Option Pricing 449

2.16925. 84.00 = e2-16-5. 84.00 = e!S. 84.00
= 1.1735 - 84.00 = 98.57 (up 2 standard deviations)

e165. 84.00 = e-% . 84.00
.9231 - 84.00 = 77.54 (down | standard deviation)

2-2 16V-25 . 84.00 = e2-165. 84.00 = e-!6- 84.00
= 8521.84.00 = 71.58 (down 2 standard deviations)

e- 16V.25 . 84.00

u

iH

Given a volatility and time period we can always calculate the number of standard
deviations required to reach an outcome. If we have a table of standard deviations and
their associated probabilities, we can then find the probability associated with that
outcome.

In the case of options, we might often be interested in the probability of an option
with a certain exercise price being in-the-money at expiration. The movement, in
standard deviations, required for an underlying contract with price, P, to go through an
exercise price, E, at expiration is given by:

number of standard deviations = In(E/P)
wt

Example: If conditions are the same as in the last example (v=.16, P=84.00), the
movement, in standard deviations, required for a 95 call to finish in-the-money three
months from now is:

In(95/84)/(.16-V.25) = In(1.1310)/.08 = .1231/.08 = +1.5383 st. devs.

Checking a table of standard deviations, we find that there is approximately a 6.2%
chance, or about one chance in 16, of an upward move of 1.5383 standard deviations.

In the case of a stock, a slight modification is necessary because the volatility
represents price movement away from the forward price. If P is the current stock price,
t is the time period, r is the risk-free interest rate, and D is the amount of dividends
expected over the period, the forward price of the stock, P,, is:

Pp=P-et~D
Example: Suppose interest rates are at 8%. If a certain non-dividend paying stock

is trading at 38 and has an annual volatility of 27%, the movement, in standard
deviations, needed for a 35 put to finish in-the-money six months (t=.5) from now is:

1n[35/(38-28 5)/(.27-V5) = 1n(35/39.55)/.191
—.122/.191 = -.64 standard deviations

Checking a table of standard deviations, we find that there is approximately a 26%
chance, or about one chance in four, of a downward move of .64 standard deviations.

Ut

tt


--- 第 458 页 ---

“+ Appendix C

Characteristics
of Volatility Spreads


--- 第 459 页 ---

Appendix C

°

Q
0

Buo}
yous

Buo}
yous

Buoy
(°)

yoys
i?)

uonsod
yoequos

°

yoys

0
Buo}
uopjsod
yoequoo

apisumog = apisdn

syuny
sdjey

syny
sdjoy

sdjoy
syny

sdjoy
syny

sdjay
sdjey

suny
suny

Ajjesoueit
Su Jo

(sdjey) suny
(suny) sdjey

(syny) sdjay
(sdjay) syny

(sdjey) suny
(suny) sdjey

(sdjey) syny
(suny) sdjey

(sdjoy) suny
(sdjay) suny

(sunny) sdjey
(suny) sdjey
Ayjessueb

AyNE}OA payjduy] Uy
eBessed sy, (eseo109p)eseol0U] Uy

sdjey
suny

sdyey
suny

syny
sdjey

suny
sdjeu

suny
suny

sdjay
sdjey

Ajjesoueb
BuyAjzapun ay) uy)
eaow ofuel y

+
+

eben, RPYL PUWEDH eYOG

len lenul

+
+

ao

0
(°)

rept)

(one }:}) peaids ow) yous
(oned 4:2) peaids oj Buo7]

Aayng yous
Aueyng Buc]

ejGuels yous
ej6uens Buoy

O[ppeljs YOUS
a[ppeays Buoy]

peaids |Pomea OBI Ind
pealds |POMaA ole kD

peaidsyoeq yng
pealdsyord IIe
edd, peaids

(jeuyneu eyJep Ajayewuixoidde oq 0} potunsse ore speaids |e)

speeids Ayejo, Jo sonsusyoeeYyy ‘1-5 eanbig

452


--- 第 460 页 ---

“* Appendix D +
What’s the Right Strategy?

The following chart is designed to help the reader choose the types of strategies which
are most likely to be profitable given a trader’s opinion on market direction and
volatility. Even though several strategies may be appropriate under the same market
conditions, each strategy will have its own unique risk/reward characteristics. The
reader should refer to the text for a more detailed analysis of each strategy.

The implied volatility component, whether low, moderate, or high, is in compari-
son to a trader’s own volatility forecast. If the trader believes that 15% is a reasonable
forecast, but implied volatility is 13%, then implied volatility is low. If the trader believes
that 20% is a reasonable forecast, but implied volatility is 24%, then implied volatility is
high. If the trader’s volatility forecast is approximately the same as the implied volatility,
then implied volatility is moderate.

Any of the listed strategies can be done synthetically. Instead of buying (selling) a
call, a trader can buy (sell) a put with the same exercise price and buy (sell) an
underlying contract (synthetic long (short) call). Instead of buying (selling) a put, a trader
can buy (sell) a call with the same exercise price and sell (buy) an underlying contract
(synthetic long (short) put).

The only scenario for which there is no appropriate strategy is one in which a trader
has no opinion on either implied volatility or market direction. In such a case a
disciplined trader will choose to sit on the sidelines until trading conditions become
more opportune.

In-the-money call butterflies and time spreads, and out-of-the-money put butterflies
and time spreads, are those in which all exercise prices are lower than the current price
of the underlying contract. Out-of-the-money call butterflies and time spreads, and
in-the-money put butterflies and time spreads, are those in which all exercise prices are
higher than the current price of the underlying contract.

453


--- 第 461 页 ---

Appendix D

speeds aun (nd) eo (W1O) WLI Iles
sempeyng (ind) |/e9 (WLI) WLO Ang
ind WLY [lesand WLO Ang
122 WLLY asqyeo WL Ang
ispeads [eave qjnq
s}nd peyeu [jes

“*  speaids ey ynd Jo treo WL |]es
Salayng ynd Jo |je0 Wy Ang
sa[buens/sa|ppelys ||es

speaids feos olyed

speeds aun (ind) jo (WLI) WLO [les
sajjperng (nd) eo (WLO) WLI Anq
ind WLY 1as/ind Wit Ang
eo WY Hes/Ire> WLO Ang
ispeaids jeoen seaq
s]/eo peyeu jjes

BulApepun ayy Ang

uolyeora uo ob

BurApepun ay jos
ayespow

speaids awn (ind) (29 (WLI) WLO Ang

sayyayng (nd) eo (WLO) WLE HES
ind wil esand why Ang
19 W.LO Ilesireo WL Ang

ispeaids [eolyeaa jing

sjjeo payeu Anq

using

speeds en ynd Jo eo WLY Anq
seleyng ynd Jo [eo WILY [19S
se|bues/saippeys Anq
speaidsyoeq

feajney
NOILO2YId LENYVAN

speaids owl; (nd) je (WLO) WLI Anq
salpenng (ind) 1129 (WL) WLO les
nd WLO IlesAnd ;wwiw Ang

eo WLI Hesyireo Wi Ang
speaids jeomen seaq

sjnd peyeu Anq
MO

Yyspeeg

454

ABUOW-aU}-Jo-}nO = WLO

_ ALTILLW TOA GarMdill
A@UOUI-alj-ye = WL AauoW-oyj-ul = Wi

éABayeays 1YyBiy ey) s.jeyM + 1-G eanbi4



--- 第 462 页 ---

+ Appendix E +

Synthetic and Arbitrage
Relationships


--- 第 463 页 ---

Appendix E

456

(uowl uonerndxa Jualayiip 2 UE = YWOW uoTerdxa uo uy

SuIAapun Lous onayyuds * ZurAyapun Bu0j mnayyudés — Trou Aral
aod asPpJexe JUalaljip 2 1e + ald esJalexe auo ye xo.
SULA[Jepun Woys OpeyUAs SULAJJepun Zuo] ONeyyUAS — q

qnd Woys + [Jeo 8uo] + BulALJepun Woys =
Suldapun Zuo] speuuAs + BulAJapun Woys = uUO[sIaAuod aSleAel

Ind 8ugj + [Jeo Woys + Sursapun 8uoy =
SUIAPapunN Joys MNeuyuds + BuLALepuN SUO] = UOTSJeAUOD

yea ous + BuLAyJepun suo] = nd Woys IpetuAs
yea 8uo0] + suLAvepuniioys = ynd 8uo; INeyluAs

qnd loys + sulAjepun Woys = [feo Woys sNeylUAS
ind suo] + BuAepun Zuol = peo BuO] OPeuqUAS

ynd uo] + [feo Woys = BurAjepun ioys onauyuds
IndlOUsS + Ted BUC] = BuiAJapun Bu] opeuyuAs

soBoeNs eseIq1y

isyueTeamby onetpuds

(‘ayep uoneudxe pue soqid asjosexe aes ay) sary 0} pauinsse ose suondo ‘pajou astaayjo sau)

SHIDALVULS FOVALIGUV UNV SLNATVAINO OLLAHLNAS


--- 第 464 页 ---

457

Synthetic and Arbitrage Relationships

spuaplalp poedxe — (gold aspuexe Wue}-Woys) anfea Jueseid — (gatid asa 1exe wWa1-8u0}) anyea quasaid =
SpUaplAIp pajoadxe — 1XeU a} 0} uonendxe suo woy eld asioiexe et} U0 $1809 3UTALIe9 = Jeyseut 110. Alpe!

(sadlid astoxe UeeAK eq qUNOWIe) aneA Weseld = JeyxRUl X0G

spUaplalp pewedxe — (aotad astoJexe) oud SuTALIeD + adhd asfaJexe — aoud ead 3utAyapun =
god and — eoqid yao = Jeyreul ZurAapun snemuAs
sypo}s Joy
(‘anjea uoneddxe ay} 01
[eoWUep! st onjea quasead ayy pue ‘Osez ale s1s0o BurAe) [je uaulapias sadAy-semyny 0} oalqns are JeyeW seunjny e Uy suondo uat Aa}

(sao}id asfJexe Ueemleq quNowe) anjea yuasaid = JoyseW KOT

(g0ud estoexe — aud saminy) 1809 SUIALIeS — gold astoJexe — ad1id 8ujApapun =
gold ind — yjeo = yeyxeul SujAapun IneupuAs
syayepy Samnyny 104

(q xipuaddy
ul uonUNY yeUeuodxe ot} JO uopduosap ety aes ‘enjea quasaid, Jo WOIssNOsIp parfelep aLOUl e 104 “sso SulALeD at Aq payunoosip
uoreddxe ye anjea auf s] ,,anyea Ueseld,, “yoneudxe 0] AL2D JO 1s02 ot aq 0} JURAUE ST 3809 BULA, SdIysuOnejel SULMOTIOS aU} Uy)

(pontulied asfosexe Ajreo ou)

SNOLLdO NVadOUNd WOd SANTVA qOVULIGUVY


--- 第 465 页 ---

Appendix E

458

peoids awit) Ind (Zuo]) Wous + peasds our [je GQuoys) BuO] =
YJUOU JUSIaYIP & UT UOTSIZAUOD asJeAal + UJUOU! GUO Ut UOISJAAUOD = [[OL ATjel

a[zuens G1oys) Zuo, + appens (ZUOT) Woys =
Agueying uon (Buop) WoYs = AyseNg (20ys) UOT

Sedld as}aJaxe JayZIYy ayy ye xOq (BUOT) Woys + sadud asioJexe JeMO] Buy Te XOg (QOS) Fuoj =
Saou esialexe ewes ou Uta Ayenng ind Guop) woys + Ayseyng [2d Qsoys) Buoy

sajep uonendxe pue saoud esiojexa owes at) UM Aysering nd = Agieyng [eo

peeids ind yeonsea (TING) eaq + peaids feo jedpJeA (1eeq) TING =
aod asdJaXe JUaJaIp & Te UOISI@AUOD asiaAal + adLd as{IJexe BuO Je UOISIaAUOD = xOq

SdIHSNOILV Tae TOAISN WAIHLO


--- 第 466 页 ---

** Appendix F +

Recommended Reading

This book represents only one of many possible approaches to option evaluation and
trading. The reader who desires a complete proficiency in options is strongly advised to
seek out as many different sources of information as possible.

The following list includes those books which are likely to be of interest to the
serious option trader. An attempt has been made to categorize books according to their
jevel of difficulty (usually in terms of the mathematics involved), although categoriza-
tions are subjective and in some cases may overlap. Where possible, the primary focus of
the book (stock options, futures options, interest rates, currencies, etc.) has also been noted.

(References to academic articles, including the original presentation of the more
commonly used pricing models, appear as footnotes in the text.)

ELEMENTARY BOOKS

Barenblat, Scot G.; and Mesler, Donald T.
Stock Index Options (stock indexes)
Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL

1992; 206 p.

Caplan, David

The Options Advantage (futures)
Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL
1991; 222 p.

Colburn, James T.

Trading in Options on Futures (futures)

The New York Institute of Finance; New York, NY
1990; 310 p.

Frost, Ronald J.

Options on Futures, Revised Edition (futures)
Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL

1994, 254 p.

Fuliman, Scott H.

Options: A Personal Seminar (stocks)

New York Institute of Finance; New York, NY
1992; 373 p.

459


--- 第 467 页 ---

460 Appendix F

Hexton, Richard

Dealing in Traded Options (stocks)

Prentice-Hall International Ltd.; Hertfordshire, UK
1989; 192 p.

Luft, Carl F.; and Sheiner, Richard K.

Understanding and Trading Listed Stock Options, Rev. Ed. (stocks)
Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL

1994, 231 p.

Mayer, Terry S.

Commodity Options (futures)

New York Institute of Finance; New York, NY
1983; 300 p.

McMillan, Lawrence G.

Options as a Strategic Investment (stocks)

The New York Institute of Finance; New York, NY
Third Edition, 1993; 882 p.

The Options Institute (editor)

Options: Essential Concepts and Trading Strategies (stocks)
Business One Irwin; Homewood, IL

1990; 403 p.

Smith, Courtney

Option Strategies (stocks)

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; New York, NY
1987; 256 p.

Thomsett, Michael C.

Getting Started in Options (stocks)
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; New York, NY
1989; 229 p.

Walker, Joseph A.

How the Options Markets Work (stocks)
New York Institute of Finance; New York, NY
1991; 229 p.

Wasendorf, Russell R.; and McCafferty, Thomas A.
All About Options

Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL

1993; 213 p.


--- 第 468 页 ---

Recommended Reading

INTERMEDIATE BOOKS

Baird, Allen Jan

Option Market Making (futures)

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; New York, NY
1993; 201 p.

Bookstaber, Richard M.

Option Pricing and Investment Strategies (stocks)
Third Edition

Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL

1991; 300 p.

Bookstaber, Richard M.; and Clarke, Roger G.

Option Strategies for Institutional Investment Management (stocks)
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc.; Menlo Park, CA

1983; 168 p.

Clasing, Henry K, Jr.; Lombard, Odile; and Marteau, Didier
Currency Options (currencies)

Business One Irwin; Homewood, IL

1992; 270 p.

Denning, Hugh

Equity Options: Valuation, Trading & Practical Strategies (stocks)
Longman Professional; Melbourne, Australia

1991; 183 p.

DeRosa, David F.

Options on Foreign Exchange (currencies)
Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL

1992; 272 p.

Fabozzi, Frank J.

Winning the Interest Rate Game: A Guide to Debt Options (interest rates)

Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL
1985; 300 p.

Fabozzi, Frank J.

The Handbook of Fixed-Income Options (interest rates)
Probus Publishing Co.; Chicago, IL

1989; 657 p.

Figlewski, Stephen; Silber, William L.;

and Subrahmanyam, Marti G. (editors)
Financial Options: From Theory to Practice
Business One Irwin; Homewood, IL

1992; 579 p.

461


--- 第 469 页 ---

462 Appendix F

Fitzgerald, Desmond M.

Financial Options (stocks)

Euromoney Publications; London, England
1987; 262 p.

Gastineau, Gary

The Options Manual (stocks)
McGraw Hill; New York, NY
Third Edition, 1988; 440 p.

Gemmill, Gordon

Option Pricing: An International Perspective
McGraw-Hill; London

1993; 267 p.

Kolb, Robert W.

Options: The Investor’s Complete Toolkit (stocks)
New York Institute of Finance; New York, NY
1991; 216p.

Labuszewski, John W.; and Nyhoff, John E.
Trading Options on Futures (futures)

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; New York, NY
1988; 264 p.

Labuszewski, John; and Sinquefield, Jeanne
Inside the Commodity Option Markets (futures)
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; New York, NY

1985; 384 p.

Smith, A.L.H.

Trading Financial Options
Butterworths; London, England
1986; 200 p.

Sutton, W. H.

Trading Currency Options (currencies)

The New York Institute of Finance; New York, NY
1988; 208 p.

Tompkins, Robert

Options Explained (futures/interest rates)

MacMillan Publishers Ltd.; Basingstoke, Hants, England
1991; 301 p.

Wong, M. Anthony

Trading and Investing in Bond Options (interest rates)
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; New York, NY

1991; 262 p.


--- 第 470 页 ---

Recommended Reading

ADVANCED BOOKS

Brenner, Menachem (editor)

Option Pricing: Theory and Applications (stocks)
Lexington Books; Lexington, MA

1983; 235 p.

Cox, John C.; and Rubenstein, Mark
Options Markets (stocks)
Prentice-Hall; Englewood Heights, NJ
1985; 498 p.

Gibson, Rajna

Option Evaluation: Analyzing and Pricing Standardized Option Contracts
McGraw-Hill, Inc.; New York, NY

1991; 304 p.

Hodges, Stewart (editor)

Options: Recent Advances in Theory and Practice
Manchester University Press; Manchester, England
1990; 181 p.

Hull, John C.

Options, Futures, and Other Derivative Securities
Prentice-Hall, Inc.; Englewood Cliffs, NJ

2nd Edition, 1993; 492 p.

Jarrow, Robert; and Rudd, Andrew
Option Pricing (stocks)

Dow Jones-Irwin; Homewood, IL
1983; 235 p.

Ritchken, Peter

Options: Theory, Strategy and Applications (stocks)
Scott, Foresman and Co.; Glenview, IL

1987; 414p.

463


--- 第 471 页 ---

Index

ev AY
Adjustment, 84, 168-169, 193-195
American Stock Exchange, 6n, 303
Assignment, 4-6, 224-225
Arbitrage, 218, 456
ARCH Model, 280
Atthe-money. See Option, at-the-money
* BY
Backspread, 138-139, 145, 200, 452
intermarket, 338
Backwardation, 129
Barone-Adesi, Giovanni, 248, 438n
Beckers, Stan, 66n, 397n, 400n
Binomial tree, 435
Black, Fischer, 40n, 43, 431n, 432n
Bollerslav, T., 281n
Box, 228-231, 254, 456~458
Burghardt, Galen, 275n
Butterfly, 145-148, 235-236, 452, 458
body of, 145n
bull and bear, 201
wings of, 145n
Buy/write, 261
% Cc a
Calendar spread. See Time spread
Cap, 265
Carrying costs, 38, 41-42, 111, 221-223,
249-250, 436. See also Interest
rates
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), 2, 6n,
128, 129, 134
Chicago Board Options Exchange
(CBOE), 2, 43, 120, 197, 231, 323,
329n, 343

Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), 2,
120, 133, 272, 323, 324n
Chicago Stock Exchange, 303, 327n
Christmas tree, 157-158
Clearing firm, 8-9
Clearing house, 8-9
Collar, 265
Commodity Exchange, Inc. (COMEX),
105, 128, 131
Condor, 158
Contango relationship, 128
Contingency order, 170
Contract position, 360
Conversion, 217-219, 456
Conversion/reversal market, 219. See
also Synthetic market
Covered write, 260-262
Cox, John, 248, 400n, 434n
Curvature. See Gamma
Cylinder, 264
¢D<
Delta, 82, 99, 359-360
American vs. European option, 250,
253
as a condition for early exercise, 246
248
as a probability, 102
as a rate of change, 99
as an equivalent underlying position,
101-102
characteristics, 118
dollar ($delta), 332
effect of price change. See Gamma
effect of volatility change, 106, 110,
210

465


--- 第 472 页 ---

466

effect of time passage, 106, 110
implied, 120
of an index futures contract, 311-312
risk, 179, 353
Delta neutral, 82, 106, 110, 137, 159,
199, 227
Diagonal spread, 157, 201n
Diffusion process, 394-395
Distribution, 400-404
high volatility, 55, 56
lognormal, 61-64
low volatility, 54, 56
normal, 52-53, 440
Dividend, 38, 42, 49, 113n, 120, 244n
effect on arbitrage, 228
effect on early exercise, 243-245
effect on index futures, 306-307
Dividend play, 250-251
Dollar delta neutral, 333
Dowrrtick, 93
Dynamic hedge, 93
eEe
Edge, 37, 123, 173, 175, 359
Elasticity, 123-124, 126
Engle, R.F., 281n
Execution risk, 224
Exercise, 4-5, 224-225
Exercise price, 1-4, 44-45, 46
Ex-dividend, 48
Expected return, 36-37, 40, 210
Expiration, 1-4, 44-45, 46-47
Exponential function, 446-449

oF &

Fence, 263-265

Figlewski, Stephen, 40n

Floor, 265

Forced liquidation, 227, 255

Forward price, 42

Front spread. See Ratio vertical spread

e Ge
Gamma, 103, 105-106, 160, 360-361

Index

and adjustments, 196
characteristics, 118-119
dollar (Sgamma), 346
effect of changing market conditions,
106
implied, 120
of volatility spreads, 160-161
tisk, 179, 353
GARCH Model, 281
Garman, Mark B., 66n, 433n
Grabbe, J. Orlin, 433n
Graph
expiration, 23-24
theoretical, 358-363
Guts, 143

H

%
Bd

Haircut, 9n
Heath, David, 393n
Hedge ratio, 45, 82,101. See also Delta
Ho, Thomas, 393n
Horizontal spread. See Time spread
Hull, John, 393n
ole
In-the-money. See Option, in-the-money
Index, 301
capitalization weighted, 302
divisor, 303
implied value, 309
options, early exercise of, 316-320
price weighted, 302
quoted price, 311
replication, 304-305
substitute, 322-326
Interest rates, 38, 45, 47-48, 87, 116,
129, 264-265, 388-389, 445
effect on arbitrage, 223-224
effect on early exercise, 241-242,
245-246, 250n
effect on index futures, 306
Interest play, 252
Investor's Business Daily, 31n
Iron butterfly, 158


--- 第 473 页 ---

Index

%
% J %

Jarrow, Robert, 393n

Jelly roll, 231-233, 254, 456-458
Jump-diffusion process, 395, 397
Jump process, 394-395

& K &
Kappa. See Vega
Klass, Michael J., 66n
Kohlhagen, Steven W., 433n
Kuberek, Robert C., 281n
Kurtosis, 402-404, 440-441, 443
ol?
Ladder. See Christmas tree
Lane, Morton, 275n
LEAPS, 388
Lee, Sang-Bin, 393n
Leg, 181n
Leverage value, 124
Liquidity, 181, 196-197, 272
Logarithmic function, 446-449
London International Financial Futures
and Options Exchange (LIFFE}, 405
Long, 11~12
Long premium, 160
Lot position. See Contract position
eM?
Margin, 9-10, 255
Market
arbitrage-free, 42
frictionless, 87, 386
locked, 87, 386
Mean, 56-57, 59, 60, 440-441
Merton, Robert, 397n
Model, 37-38
ARCH (autoregressive conditional het-
eroskedasticity}, 280, 281n
binomial. See Model, Cox-Ross-
Rubenstein
Black, 44, 353n, 432-433
Black-Scholes, 43-44, 48, 81, 248,
315, 352, 353n, 431-432, 446

467

assumptions in, 64, 385
CEV (constant elasticity of variance),
400
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein, 248-249, 315,
347n, 434-438
GARCH (generalized autoregressive
conditional heteroskedasticity},
281, 281n
Garman-Kohthagen, 44, 48, 433
jump-diffusion, 397
quadratic. See Model, Whaley
theoretical pricing, 38, 40-41, 132
Whaley, 248-249, 438-439
Moments, 440
Morton, Andrew, 393n
oN
Naked positions, 199
Natural long and short, 257
Nelson, David B., 281n
New York Futures Exchange, 131
New York Mercantile Exchange
(NYMEX}, 2, 128
New York Stock Exchange, 303, 343
New York Times, 31n
Newton-Raphson search, 446

70%
Option
American, 4, 44, 113, 120n, 148n,
241

at-the-money, 7-8, 106, 110, 205,
208-209

call, 1

European, 6, 44, 113, 204n, 213,
239, 240, 242n

flex, 2n

in-the-money, 7-8, 111, 113, 205

out-of the-money, 7~8, 205

ona spread, 351-352

put, 1

replication, 94

serial, 2

type, 1


--- 第 474 页 ---

468

value at expiration, 13-19
Outliers, 401
Out-of-the-money. See Option, out-of

the-money
Overwrite, 261
<P
Pacific Stock Exchange, 303
Parity. See Value, intrinsic
Parkinson, Michael, 66n
Philadelphia Stock Exchange, 6n, 303
Pin risk, 224-226
Portfolio insurance, 94, 271
Program. trading, 310
Pseudo-American Call, 248
Put-Call Parity, 216
Premium, 6
Present value, 222n, 447
Price relative, 443
Protective option, 258-260
eR &

Random walk, 51-52
Range forward, 264
Ratio backspread. See Backspread
Ratio spread, 141-142

bull and bear, 199-200
Ratio vertical spread, 139-141, 145,

200, 452

intermarket, 339
Ratio write, 266
Reversal. See Reverse conversion
Reverse Conversion, 217-219, 456
Riskless hedge, 45
Rho, 116-118, 180
Roll. See Jelly roll
Ross, Stephen, 248, 400n, 434n
Rubenstein, Mark, 248, 434n

%,
& S &

Scalping, 127

Scholes, Myron, 43, 431n
Schroeder, Mark, 400n
Scott, Louis D., 393n

Index

Settlement
cash, 226, 305, 314
futures-type, 10-11, 220
of stock index contracts, 315n
prices, 406n
tisk, 226-228
stock-type, 10-11, 220
Short, 11-12
Short premium, 160
Short sale, 93, 156-157, 386
Short squeeze, 157
Skewness, 402-403, 440-441, 443
Splitprice conversion and reversal, 264
Spread, 127-129
crack, 335-336
intermarket, 331
intramarket, 128, 331
long and short, 147
entering an order. 169-171
NOB, 129
Standard deviation, 56-58, 59, 60-61,
381, 440-443
daily and weekly, 65~66
sample, 440n
Stock split, 46n
Straddle, 141-142, 187, 236, 398-399,
452
Strangle, 143-144, 187, 452
Strike price. See Exercise price
Synthetics, 213-214, 456
in futures option markets, 220-221
in stock option markets, 221-223
in stock index markets, 320-322
using in volatility spreads, 233-235
Synthetic market, 216, 457
% T %
Taxes, 87, 386
Tender offer, 156, 254
Theta, 111, 113, 361-362
characteristics, 119
dollar ($theta}, 114n, 346
implied, 120
of volatility spreads, 160-161


--- 第 475 页 ---

Index

risk, 179, 353
Three-way, 229
Time box, 233
Time decay. See Theta
Time premium. See Value, time
Time spread, 148-154, 237, 452, 458
bull and bear, 201
effect of dividends, 155
effect of interest rates, 154-155
effect of price change, 150-151
effect of time passage, 149-150
effect of volatility, 151-153, 168
in hedging strategies, 267
in futures option markets, 153-154
Transaction costs, 87, 181, 387
Tunnel, 264

& U &
Underlying, 1-4, 45
Up-tick, 93

ex Vv %
Value

extrinsic. See Value, time
intrinsic, 6-7, 13
of an underlying contract, 84n
time, 6-7, 261
theoretical, 37~38, 40
Variation, 11, 387n
Vega, 113-115, 361-362
dollar (Svega), 114n, 347
effect of time passage, 115
characteristics, 119-120
implied, 120
of volatility spreads, 160-161, 166
tisk, 179-180, 353

Vertical spread, 202-211, 235-236, 252

in hedging strategies, 267

importance of implied volatility, 208

Volatility, 45, 49, 390-393, 399-400
and observed price changes, 67~68
as a standard deviation, 60-61
calculation of historical, 443-446
calculation of implied, 446

469

cone, 275
effect of changes. See Vega
forecast, 70-71
future, 69
historical, 69-70, 71
implied, 72-74, 89, 166, 177, 208,
266, 355
implied versus historical, 290-295
implied versus future, 295-299
mean reverting, 275
of interest rate products, 68-69, 393
realized, 70
relationships, 342-345
seasonal, 76
serial correlation, 280
skew, 407
stochastic, 393
trends, 275
Volume Investors, 105
% W Bo
Wall Street Journal, The, 31n
Whaley, Robert, 248, 438n
White, Alan, 393n
Wiggins, J.B., 393n
Wilcox, Darrell, 352, 434
